The secular cooling that must someday overtake our planet has already
gone far indeed with our neighbour.

Their world is far gone in its cooling and this
world is still crowded with life, but crowded only with what they
regard as inferior animals.

The storm burst upon us six years ago now.

And invisible to me because it was so remote and small, flying swiftly
and steadily towards me across that incredible distance, drawing nearer
every minute by so many thousands of miles, came the Thing they were
sending us, the Thing that was to bring so much struggle and calamity
and death to the earth.

I wished I had a
light to smoke by, little suspecting the meaning of the minute gleam I
had seen and all that it would presently bring me.

It seems to me now almost
incredibly wonderful that, with that swift fate hanging over us, men
could go about their petty concerns as they did.

But very early in the morning poor Ogilvy, who had seen the shooting
star and who was persuaded that a meteorite lay somewhere on the common
between Horsell, Ottershaw, and Woking, rose early with the idea of
finding it.

Find it he did, soon after dawn, and not far from the
sand-pits.

It was such a gradual movement that
he discovered it only through noticing that a black mark that had been
near him five minutes ago was now at the other side of the
circumference.

“Good heavens!” said Ogilvy.

The thought of the confined creature was so dreadful to him that he
forgot the heat and went forward to the cylinder to help turn.

He
met a waggoner and tried to make him understand, but the tale he told
and his appearance were so wild—his hat had fallen off in the pit—that
the man simply drove on.

“It’s out on Horsell Common now.”

“Good Lord!” said Henderson.

That’s good.”

They shouted
consolation and promises, and went off back to the town again to get
help.

I was
naturally startled, and lost no time in going out and across the
Ottershaw bridge to the sand-pits.

I think they perceived that nothing was to be done for the present, and
had gone away to breakfast at Henderson’s house.

Among these were a couple of cyclists, a jobbing gardener I employed
sometimes, a girl carrying a baby, Gregg the butcher and his little
boy, and two or three loafers and golf caddies who were accustomed to
hang about the railway station.

It was only when I got thus close to it that the strangeness of this
object was at all evident to me.

My mind ran
fancifully on the possibilities of its containing manuscript, on the
difficulties in translation that might arise, whether we should find
coins and models in it, and so forth.

Going to the edge of the pit, I found it occupied by a group of about
half a dozen men—Henderson, Ogilvy, and a tall, fair-haired man that I
afterwards learned was Stent, the Astronomer Royal, with several
workmen wielding spades and pickaxes.

As soon as Ogilvy saw me among the staring
crowd on the edge of the pit he called to me to come down, and asked me
if I would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, the lord of the manor.

They wanted a light railing put up,
and help to keep the people back.

I failed to find Lord
Hilton at his house, but I was told he was expected from London by the
six o’clock train from Waterloo; and as it was then about a quarter
past five, I went home, had some tea, and walked up to the station to
waylay him.

some sort of struggle appeared
to be going on about the pit.

I’m a-goin’ ’ome, I am.”

“I say!” said Ogilvy; “help keep these idiots back.

I looked again at the cylinder, and ungovernable
terror gripped me.

The peculiar V-shaped mouth with its
pointed upper lip, the absence of brow ridges, the absence of a chin
beneath the wedgelike lower lip, the incessant quivering of this mouth,
the Gorgon groups of tentacles, the tumultuous breathing of the lungs
in a strange atmosphere, the evident heaviness and painfulness of
movement due to the greater gravitational energy of the earth—above
all, the extraordinary intensity of the immense eyes—were at once
vital, intense, inhuman, crippled and monstrous.

There was something
fungoid in the oily brown skin, something in the clumsy deliberation of
the tedious movements unspeakably nasty.

Now
he got his shoulder and knee up, and again he seemed to slip back until
only his head was visible.

I had a momentary impulse to go
back and help him that my fears overruled.

I did not dare to go back towards the pit, but I felt a passionate
longing to peer into it.

What could be going on there?

“Good God!

It was this, as much as anything, that gave people courage, and I
suppose the new arrivals from Woking also helped to restore confidence.

The Martians and
their appliances were altogether invisible, save for that thin mast
upon which their restless mirror wobbled.

Nothing was changed save for that and a terrible astonishment.

It came to me that I was upon this dark common, helpless, unprotected,
and alone.

Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a collision, had
telegraphed from Horsell to the barracks as soon as the Martians
emerged, for the help of a company of soldiers to protect these strange
creatures from violence.

Only the
fact that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower part of the
Heat-Ray saved them.

Then, with a
whistling note that rose above the droning of the pit, the beam swung
close over their heads, lighting the tops of the beech trees that line
the road, and splitting the bricks, smashing the windows, firing the
window frames, and bringing down in crumbling ruin a portion of the
gable of the house nearest the corner.

At last I could go no further; I was exhausted with the violence of my
emotion and of my flight, and I staggered and fell by the wayside.

My hat had gone, and my collar had burst away from its
fastener.

He passed me, wishing me good night.

Over the Maybury arch a train, a billowing tumult of white, firelit
smoke, and a long caterpillar of lighted windows, went flying
south—clatter, clatter, clap, rap, and it had gone.

“To think he may be lying dead there!”

My wife at least did not find my experience incredible.

The atmosphere of the earth, we now know, contains far more oxygen or
far less argon (whichever way one likes to put it) than does Mars’.

The
invigorating influences of this excess of oxygen upon the Martians
indisputably did much to counterbalance the increased weight of their
bodies.

Perhaps they
expected to find no living things—certainly no intelligent living
things.”

In Woking junction, until a late hour, trains were stopping and going
on, others were shunting on the sidings, passengers were alighting and
waiting, and everything was proceeding in the most ordinary way.

A curious crowd lingered restlessly, people coming and going but the
crowd remaining, both on the Chobham and Horsell bridges.

One or two
adventurous souls, it was afterwards found, went into the darkness and
crawled quite near the Martians; but they never returned, for now and
again a light-ray, like the beam of a warship’s searchlight swept the
common, and the Heat-Ray was ready to follow.

Save for such, that big
area of common was silent and desolate, and the charred bodies lay
about on it all night under the stars, and all the next day.

The colonel of the regiment came to the Chobham bridge and was busy
questioning the crowd at midnight.

At the same time he
told me of the burning of the pine woods about the Byfleet Golf Links.

He
laughed with an air of the greatest good humour as he said this.

None of them had seen
the Martians, and they had but the vaguest ideas of them, so that they
plied me with questions.

What we got to do is to go as near as the ground’ll let
us, and then drive a trench.”

“Blow yer trenches!

“Ain’t they got any necks, then?” said a third, abruptly—a little,
contemplative, dark man, smoking a pipe.

I got back to lunch about two, very tired for, as I have said, the day
was extremely hot and dull; and in order to refresh myself I took a
cold bath in the afternoon.

They seemed very helpless in that pit of theirs.

About six in the evening, as I sat at tea with my wife in the
summerhouse talking vigorously about the battle that was lowering upon
us, I heard a muffled detonation from the common, and immediately after
a gust of firing.

Then I fetched out the servant, telling her I would go
upstairs myself for the box she was clamouring for.

“But where are we to go?” said my wife in terror.

I found him in his bar, quite unaware of what was
going on behind his house.

“What for?”

“And I’ll bring it back by midnight,” I said.

Two pounds, and you bring it back?

What’s going on now?”

I explained hastily that I had to leave my home, and so secured the dog
cart.

He
was going from house to house, warning people to leave.

He was going on
as I came out of my front door, lugging my treasures, done up in a
tablecloth.

I ran to my neighbour’s door and rapped to satisfy myself of
what I already knew, that his wife had gone to London with him and had
locked up their house.

We got to Leatherhead without misadventure about nine
o’clock, and the horse had an hour’s rest while I took supper with my
cousins and commended my wife to their care.

Something very
like the war fever that occasionally runs through a civilised community
had got into my blood, and in my heart I was not so very sorry that I
had to return to Maybury that night.

Then abruptly she
turned and went in, leaving my cousins side by side wishing me good
hap.

And in an
instant it was gone.

I walked among the trees trying to find the footpath.

If I had fully realised the meaning of all the things I had seen I
should have immediately worked my way round through Byfleet to Street
Cobham, and so gone back to rejoin my wife at Leatherhead.

I had a vague idea of going on to my own house, and that was as much
motive as I had.

Down the road towards Maybury Bridge there were voices and the sound of
feet, but I had not the courage to shout or to go to them.

I got
up almost mechanically, went into the dining room and drank some
whisky, and then I was moved to change my clothes.

The towers of the Oriental College and the
pine trees about it had gone, and very far away, lit by a vivid red
glare, the common about the sand-pits was visible.

What had happened in the last seven hours I
still did not know; nor did I know, though I was beginning to guess,
the relation between these mechanical colossi and the sluggish lumps I
had seen disgorged from the cylinder.

With a queer feeling of
impersonal interest I turned my desk chair to the window, sat down, and
stared at the blackened country, and particularly at the three gigantic
black things that were going to and fro in the glare about the
sand-pits.

“Where are you going?”

“God knows.”

“My God!”

It was a long time before he could steady his nerves to answer my
questions, and then he answered perplexingly and brokenly.

At
that time firing was going on across the common, and it was said the
first party of Martians were crawling slowly towards their second
cylinder under cover of a metal shield.

And the smell—good God!
Like burnt meat!

The
giant saved Woking station and its cluster of houses until the last;
then in a moment the Heat-Ray was brought to bear, and the town became
a heap of fiery ruins.

At last, after nightfall, the
artilleryman made a rush for it and got over the railway embankment.

That was the story I got from him, bit by bit.

My plan was to return at once
to Leatherhead; and so greatly had the strength of the Martians
impressed me that I had determined to take my wife to Newhaven, and go
with her out of the country forthwith.

But the artilleryman dissuaded me:
“It’s no kindness to the right sort of wife,” he said, “to make her a
widow”; and in the end I agreed to go with him, under cover of the
woods, northward as far as Street Cobham before I parted with him.

Yet, save ourselves, there did not seem to be
a living soul on Maybury Hill.

You’d better go along and report yourself to
Brigadier-General Marvin, and tell him all you know.

They had got hold of
a little hand truck, and were piling it up with unclean-looking bundles
and shabby furniture.

Several farm waggons and carts were moving creakily along the road to
Addlestone, and suddenly through the gate of a field we saw, across a
stretch of flat meadow, six twelve-pounders standing neatly at equal
distances pointing towards Woking.

The gunners stood by the guns
waiting, and the ammunition waggons were at a business-like distance.

“That’s good!” said I.

“I shall go on,” he said.

Three
or four black government waggons, with crosses in white circles, and an
old omnibus, among other vehicles, were being loaded in the village
street.

The respectable inhabitants
of the place, men in golf and boating costumes, wives prettily dressed,
were packing, river-side loafers energetically helping, children
excited, and, for the most part, highly delighted at this astonishing
variation of their Sunday experiences.

Part of the time we spent helping two old women to pack a little
cart.

As yet the
flight had not grown to a panic, but there were already far more people
than all the boats going to and fro could enable to cross.

People came
panting along under heavy burdens; one husband and wife were even
carrying a small outhouse door between them, with some of their
household goods piled thereon.

Three or four soldiers stood on the lawn of
the inn, staring and jesting at the fugitives, without offering to
help.

Nothing was to be seen save flat meadows, cows feeding
unconcernedly for the most part, and silvery pollard willows motionless
in the warm sunlight.

Little cowled figures they seemed at first, going with a
rolling motion and as fast as flying birds.

For a moment I heeded nothing of the heat, forgot the patent need of
self-preservation.

The tentacles swayed and struck like
living arms, and, save for the helpless purposelessness of these
movements, it was as if some wounded thing were struggling for its life
amid the waves.

At that I ducked at once under water, and, holding my breath until
movement was an agony, blundered painfully ahead under the surface as
long as I could.

The air was full of sound, a deafening and confusing conflict of
noises—the clangorous din of the Martians, the crash of falling houses,
the thud of trees, fences, sheds flashing into flame, and the crackling
and roaring of fire.

The nearer houses
still stood intact, awaiting their fate, shadowy, faint and pallid in
the steam, with the fire behind them going to and fro.

I screamed aloud, and scalded, half blinded, agonised,
I staggered through the leaping, hissing water towards the shore.

I fell helplessly, in
full sight of the Martians, upon the broad, bare gravelly spit that
runs down to mark the angle of the Wey and Thames.

Had they left their comrade and pushed on forthwith,
there was nothing at that time between them and London but batteries of
twelve-pounder guns, and they would certainly have reached the capital
in advance of the tidings of their approach; as sudden, dreadful, and
destructive their advent would have been as the earthquake that
destroyed Lisbon a century ago.

And meanwhile the military and naval authorities, now
fully alive to the tremendous power of their antagonists, worked with
furious energy.

And through the charred and desolated area—perhaps twenty square miles
altogether—that encircled the Martian encampment on Horsell Common,
through charred and ruined villages among the green trees, through the
blackened and smoking arcades that had been but a day ago pine
spinneys, crawled the devoted scouts with the heliographs that were
presently to warn the gunners of the Martian approach.

But the Martians
now understood our command of artillery and the danger of human
proximity, and not a man ventured within a mile of either cylinder,
save at the price of his life.

It would seem that these giants spent the earlier part of the afternoon
in going to and fro, transferring everything from the second and third
cylinders—the second in Addlestone Golf Links and the third at
Pyrford—to their original pit on Horsell Common.

There were no oars in the
boat, but I contrived to paddle, as well as my parboiled hands would
allow, down the river towards Halliford and Walton, going very
tediously and continually looking behind me, as you may well
understand.

It
was strange to see the place quite tranquil, quite desolate under the
hot blue sky, with the smoke and little threads of flame going straight
up into the heat of the afternoon.

Then my fears got the better of me again, and I resumed my paddling.

I got up presently, walked perhaps half a mile without meeting
a soul, and then lay down again in the shadow of a hedge.

I dare say he
found me a strange enough figure, naked, save for my water-soaked
trousers and socks, scalded, and my face and shoulders blackened by the
smoke.

As if it were Sodom
and Gomorrah!

Everything gone—everything destroyed.

We
rebuilt it only three years ago.

Gone!

“The smoke of her burning goeth up for ever and ever!”

What good is
religion if it collapses under calamity?

Did you think God
had exempted Weybridge?

One of them was
killed yonder not three hours ago.”

“Killed!”

“How can God’s ministers be
killed?”

“I saw it happen.”

I told him it was the heliograph signalling—that it was the sign of
human help and effort in the sky.

My brother felt no anxiety about us, as he knew from the description in
the papers that the cylinder was a good two miles from my house.

He became alarmed at the news in
this, and went again to Waterloo station to find out if communication
were restored.

“There’s fighting going on about Weybridge” was the extent of their
information.

One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and Kingston,
containing people who had gone out for a day’s boating and found the
locks closed and a feeling of panic in the air.

The sun was just setting, and the Clock Tower and
the Houses of Parliament rose against one of the most peaceful skies it
is possible to imagine, a sky of gold, barred with long transverse
stripes of reddish-purple cloud.

Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar Square, the paper in his hand,
my brother saw some of the fugitives from West Surrey.

He was driving from the direction of
Westminster Bridge; and close behind him came a hay waggon with five or
six respectable-looking people in it, and some boxes and bundles.

My brother
addressed several of these fugitives and got unsatisfactory answers
from most.

For a moment he lay astonished,
wondering whether day had come or the world gone mad.

Close on the rear of this came a
couple of cabs, the forerunners of a long procession of flying
vehicles, going for the most part to Chalk Farm station, where the
North-Western special trains were loading up, instead of coming down
the gradient into Euston.

And all about him—in the rooms below, in the houses on each side and
across the road, and behind in the Park Terraces and in the hundred
other streets of that part of Marylebone, and the Westbourne Park
district and St. Pancras, and westward and northward in Kilburn and St.
John’s Wood and Hampstead, and eastward in Shoreditch and Highbury and
Haggerston and Hoxton, and, indeed, through all the vastness of London
from Ealing to East Ham—people were rubbing their eyes, and opening
windows to stare out and ask aimless questions, dressing hastily as the
first breath of the coming storm of Fear blew through the streets.

London, which had gone to bed on
Sunday night oblivious and inert, was awakened, in the small hours of
Monday morning, to a vivid sense of danger.

As my brother hesitated on the
door-step, he saw another newsvendor approaching, and got a paper
forthwith.

His landlady came to the door, loosely wrapped in
dressing gown and shawl; her husband followed, ejaculating.

The shells flashed all round him, and he was seen to advance a few
paces, stagger, and go down.

At this sight the curate cried faintly in his throat, and began
running; but I knew it was no good running from a Martian, and I turned
aside and crawled through dewy nettles and brambles into the broad
ditch by the side of the road.

A
hundred such questions struggled together in my mind as I watched that
vast sentinel shape.

I was so excited by these heavy minute-guns following one another that
I so far forgot my personal safety and my scalded hands as to clamber
up into the hedge and stare towards Sunbury.

Save that an unknown element giving a group of four lines in the blue
of the spectrum is concerned, we are still entirely ignorant of the
nature of this substance.

From there we could see the searchlights on Richmond Hill and
Kingston Hill going to and fro, and about eleven the windows rattled,
and we heard the sound of the huge siege guns that had been put in
position there.

One may picture the orderly expectation, the officers alert and
watchful, the gunners ready, the ammunition piled to hand, the limber
gunners with their horses and waggons, the groups of civilian
spectators standing as near as they were permitted, the evening
stillness, the ambulances and hospital tents with the burned and
wounded from Weybridge; then the dull resonance of the shots the
Martians fired, and the clumsy projectile whirling over the trees and
houses and smashing amid the neighbouring fields.

One may picture, too, the sudden shifting of the attention, the swiftly
spreading coils and bellyings of that blackness advancing headlong,
towering heavenward, turning the twilight to a palpable darkness, a
strange and horrible antagonist of vapour striding upon its victims,
men and horses near it seen dimly, running, shrieking, falling
headlong, shouts of dismay, the guns suddenly abandoned, men choking
and writhing on the ground, and the swift broadening-out of the opaque
cone of smoke.

Before dawn the black vapour was pouring through the streets of
Richmond, and the disintegrating organism of government was, with a
last expiring effort, rousing the population of London to the necessity
of flight.




XVI.

After a fruitless struggle to get aboard a North-Western train at Chalk
Farm—the engines of the trains that had loaded in the goods yard there
_ploughed_ through shrieking people, and a dozen stalwart men fought to
keep the crowd from crushing the driver against his furnace—my brother
emerged upon the Chalk Farm road, dodged across through a hurrying
swarm of vehicles, and had the luck to be foremost in the sack of a
cycle shop.

The front tire of the machine he got was punctured in
dragging it through the window, but he got up and off, notwithstanding,
with no further injury than a cut wrist.

So he got out of the fury of the panic, and, skirting the Edgware Road,
reached Edgware about seven, fasting and wearied, but well ahead of the
crowd.

He came upon them
just in time to save them.

One of the men desisted and turned towards him,
and my brother, realising from his antagonist’s face that a fight was
unavoidable, and being an expert boxer, went into him forthwith and
sent him down against the wheel of the chaise.

He heard the clatter of hoofs, the whip stung
across his face, a third antagonist struck him between the eyes, and
the man he held wrenched himself free and made off down the lane in the
direction from which he had come.

Suddenly he stumbled and fell; his immediate pursuer went headlong, and
he rose to his feet to find himself with a couple of antagonists again.

He would have had little chance against them had not the slender lady
very pluckily pulled up and returned to his help.

“Go back to the chaise,” said my brother, wiping the blood from his
split lip.

“I’ll sit here,” said my brother, “if I may”; and he got upon the empty
front seat.

She explained that they had as much as thirty pounds in gold, besides a
five-pound note, and suggested that with that they might get upon a
train at St. Albans or New Barnet.

So, designing to cross the Great North Road, they
went on towards Barnet, my brother leading the pony to save it as much
as possible.

For the most part these were staring
before them, murmuring indistinct questions, jaded, haggard, unclean.

The
tumultuous noise resolved itself now into the disorderly mingling of
many voices, the gride of many wheels, the creaking of waggons, and the
staccato of hoofs.

“Good heavens!” cried Mrs. Elphinstone.

A lost retriever dog, with hanging tongue, circled dubiously
round them, scared and wretched, and fled at my brother’s threat.

“Go on!

Go on!”

There were cabs, carriages, shop-carts, waggons, beyond counting; a
mail cart, a road-cleaner’s cart marked “Vestry of St. Pancras,” a huge
timber waggon crowded with roughs.

With many of these came men, sometimes
helpful, sometimes lowering and savage.

A tumult up the road, a quarrel for a place in a waggon, sent the whole
host of them quickening their pace; even a man so scared and broken
that his knees bent under him was galvanised for a moment into renewed
activity.

“I can’t go on!

I can’t go on!”

“Go on!” said the people, thrusting at him.

Go on!”

Then my brother’s attention was distracted by a bearded, eagle-faced
man lugging a small handbag, which split even as my brother’s eyes
rested on it and disgorged a mass of sovereigns that seemed to break up
into separate coins as it struck the ground.

But he still
clutched after his money, and regarded my brother fiercely, hammering
at his arm with a handful of gold.

“Go on!

Go on!”

My brother looked up, and the man with
the gold twisted his head round and bit the wrist that held his collar.

“Let us go back!”

“We must go that way,” he said, and led the pony round again.

A waggon locked wheels for a moment and ripped a long splinter
from the chaise.

And farther on, from a lull near East Barnet, they saw two trains
running slowly one after the other without signal or order—trains
swarming with people, with men even among the coals behind the
engines—going northward along the Great Northern Railway.

And in the evening many people came
hurrying along the road nearby their stopping place, fleeing from
unknown dangers before them, and going in the direction from which my
brother had come.




XVII.

If one could have hung that
June morning in a balloon in the blazing blue above London every
northward and eastward road running out of the tangled maze of streets
would have seemed stippled black with the streaming fugitives, each dot
a human agony of terror and physical distress.

The legendary hosts of Goths and Huns, the hugest armies Asia
has ever seen, would have been but a drop in that current.

And this was
no disciplined march; it was a stampede—a stampede gigantic and
terrible—without order and without a goal, six million people unarmed
and unprovisioned, driving headlong.

Steadily,
incessantly, each black splash grew and spread, shooting out
ramifications this way and that, now banking itself against rising
ground, now pouring swiftly over a crest into a new-found valley,
exactly as a gout of ink would spread itself upon blotting paper.

A number of people now,
like my brother, had their faces eastward, and there were some
desperate souls even going back towards London to get food.

He heard that about half the members of the
government had gathered at Birmingham, and that enormous quantities of
high explosives were being prepared to be used in automatic mines
across the Midland counties.

By midday they passed through Tillingham, which,
strangely enough, seemed to be quite silent and deserted, save for a
few furtive plunderers hunting for food.

For after the sailors could no longer come up the Thames, they came on
to the Essex coast, to Harwich and Walton and Clacton, and afterwards
to Foulness and Shoebury, to bring off the people.

It was the only warship in sight, but far away
to the right over the smooth surface of the sea—for that day there was
a dead calm—lay a serpent of black smoke to mark the next ironclads of
the Channel Fleet, which hovered in an extended line, steam up and
ready for action, across the Thames estuary during the course of the
Martian conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to prevent it.

They would find George at
Stanmore....

The steamer was
going, these men said, to Ostend.

He sprang to his feet and saw to starboard, and not a hundred yards
from their heeling, pitching boat, a vast iron bulk like the blade of a
plough tearing through the water, tossing it on either side in huge
waves of foam that leaped towards the steamer, flinging her paddles
helplessly in the air, and then sucking her deck down almost to the
waterline.

Thunder Child_, steaming headlong, coming to the rescue
of the threatened shipping.

Thus
sunken, and seen in remote perspective, they appeared far less
formidable than the huge iron bulk in whose wake the steamer was
pitching so helplessly.

It would seem they were regarding this new
antagonist with astonishment.

The guns of the
_Thunder Child_ sounded through the reek, going off one after the
other, and one shot splashed the water high close by the steamer,
ricocheted towards the other flying ships to the north, and smashed a
smack to matchwood.

Then suddenly out of the golden haze of the sunset came the vibration
of guns, and a form of black shadows moving.

For a time we did not see how this change affected our position, save
that we were relieved of our fear of the Black Smoke.

When it was clear to him that I meant to
go alone—had reconciled myself to going alone—he suddenly roused
himself to come.

We got to Hampton Court without misadventure, our minds full of strange
and unfamiliar appearances, and at Hampton Court our eyes were relieved
to find a patch of green that had escaped the suffocating drift.

We
went through Bushey Park, with its deer going to and fro under the
chestnuts, and some men and women hurrying in the distance towards
Hampton, and so we came to Twickenham.

We were so terrified that we dared not go on, but turned
aside and hid in a shed in a garden.

For a time the curate was silent, and then he whispered:

“God have mercy upon us!”

Save for that sound we lay quite still in the scullery; I for my part
scarce dared breathe, and sat with my eyes fixed on the faint light of
the kitchen door.

I
told the curate I was going to seek food, and felt my way towards the
pantry.

Through the aperture in
the wall I could see the top of a tree touched with gold and the warm
blue of a tranquil evening sky.

Our house had
collapsed backward; the front portion, even on the ground floor, had
been destroyed completely; by a chance the kitchen and scullery had
escaped, and stood buried now under soil and ruins, closed in by tons
of earth on every side save towards the cylinder.

People who have never seen
these structures, and have only the ill-imagined efforts of artists or
the imperfect descriptions of such eye-witnesses as myself to go upon,
scarcely realise that living quality.

But, squeamish as I may seem, I
cannot bring myself to describe what I could not endure even to
continue watching.

Men go happy or miserable as they have healthy or unhealthy livers, or
sound gastric glands.

Micro-organisms, which cause so much disease and pain on earth, have
either never appeared upon Mars or Martian sanitary science eliminated
them ages ago.

For a time, however, the red weed
grew with astonishing vigour and luxuriance.

He wanted the slit, which permitted only one
of us to peep through; and so I had to forego watching them for a time
while he enjoyed that privilege.

At Halliford I had already come to hate the
curate’s trick of helpless exclamation, his stupid rigidity of mind.

But he was one of those weak creatures, void of
pride, timorous, anæmic, hateful souls, full of shifty cunning, who
face neither God nor man, who face not even themselves.

Those who have escaped the
dark and terrible aspects of life will find my brutality, my flash of
rage in our final tragedy, easy enough to blame; for they know what is
wrong as well as any, but not what is possible to tortured men.

But
those who have been under the shadow, who have gone down at last to
elemental things, will have a wider charity.

After a long time I ventured back to the
peephole, to find that the new-comers had been reinforced by the
occupants of no fewer than three of the fighting-machines.

And then, amid the clangour of the machinery, came a
drifting suspicion of human voices, that I entertained at first only to
dismiss.

But as the saying goes, I gripped myself with
both hands.

The
Martians had taken away the excavating-machine, and, save for a
fighting-machine that stood in the remoter bank of the pit and a
handling-machine that was buried out of my sight in a corner of the pit
immediately beneath my peephole, the place was deserted by them.

That night was a beautiful
serenity; save for one planet, the moon seemed to have the sky to
herself.

Instead of keeping close to me
and trying to oust me from the slit, the curate had gone back into the
scullery.

“It is just, O God!”

I preached acceptable folly—my God, what
folly!—when I should have stood up, though I died for it, and called
upon them to repent—repent! . . .

The wine press of God!”

He perceived a hold on me—he threatened
he would shout and bring the Martians upon us.

He talked
with his voice rising slowly, through the greater part of the eighth
and ninth days—threats, entreaties, mingled with a torrent of half-sane
and always frothy repentance for his vacant sham of God’s service, such
as made me pity him.

“For God’s sake——”

“Nay,” shouted the curate, at the top of his voice, standing likewise
and extending his arms.

I go!

Presently, with an abrupt click, it
gripped something—I thought it had me!—and seemed to go out of the
cellar again.

I heard it go into the pantry, and the biscuit-tins
rattled and a bottle smashed, and then came a heavy bump against the
cellar door.

Had it gone?

But the pantry was empty; every
scrap of food had gone.

I did not feel strong enough to crawl
noiselessly to the peephole, or I would have gone there.

On the twelfth day my throat was so painful that, taking the chance of
alarming the Martians, I attacked the creaking rain-water pump that
stood by the sink, and got a couple of glassfuls of blackened and
tainted rain water.

On the fourteenth day I went into the kitchen, and I was surprised to
find that the fronds of the red weed had grown right across the hole in
the wall, turning the half-light of the place into a crimson-coloured
obscurity.

Going into the kitchen, I saw a dog’s
nose peering in through a break among the ruddy fronds.

I crept forward, saying “Good dog!” very softly; but he suddenly
withdrew his head and disappeared.

Once or twice I heard a faint
pitter-patter like the feet of the dog going hither and thither on the
sand far below me, and there were more birdlike sounds, but that was
all.

All the machinery had
gone.

Save for the big mound of greyish-blue powder in one corner,
certain bars of aluminium in another, the black birds, and the
skeletons of the killed, the place was merely an empty circular pit in
the sand.

I could see in any direction save behind me, to the
north, and neither Martians nor sign of Martians were to be seen.

I found the water was sufficiently shallow for me to
wade securely, although the red weed impeded my feet a little; but the
flood evidently got deeper towards the river, and I turned back to
Mortlake.

I managed to make out the road by means of occasional ruins
of its villas and fences and lamps, and so presently I got out of this
spate and made my way to the hill going up towards Roehampton and came
out on Putney Common.

I hunted for
food among the trees, finding nothing, and I also raided a couple of
silent houses, but they had already been broken into and ransacked.

But though I gnawed parts of
these in my mouth, there was nothing to be got from them.

And in the
garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes,
sufficient to stay my hunger.

As I proceeded I
became more and more convinced that the extermination of mankind was,
save for such stragglers as myself, already accomplished in this part
of the world.

The Martians, I thought, had gone on and left the country
desolated, seeking food elsewhere.

Perhaps even now they were
destroying Berlin or Paris, or it might be they had gone northward.

The place had been already searched and
emptied.

In the
silence of the night, with that sense of the nearness of God that
sometimes comes into the stillness and the darkness, I stood my trial,
my only trial, for that moment of wrath and fear.

I had uttered prayers, fetish prayers,
had prayed as heathens mutter charms when I was in extremity; but now I
prayed indeed, pleading steadfastly and sanely, face to face with the
darkness of God.

Strangest in this, that so soon as dawn
had come, I, who had talked with God, crept out of the house like a rat
leaving its hiding place—a creature scarcely larger, an inferior
animal, a thing that for any passing whim of our masters might be
hunted and killed.

Perhaps they also prayed confidently to God.

The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky glowed pink, and
was fretted with little golden clouds.

I had an idea of going to
Leatherhead, though I knew that there I had the poorest chance of
finding my wife.

Certainly, unless death had overtaken them suddenly,
my cousins and she would have fled thence; but it seemed to me I might
find or learn there whither the Surrey people had fled.

I knew I wanted
to find my wife, that my heart ached for her and the world of men, but
I had no clear idea how the finding might be done.

That dark expanse was lit in patches by yellow gorse and broom; there
was no red weed to be seen, and as I prowled, hesitating, on the verge
of the open, the sun rose, flooding it all with light and vitality.

Which way are you going?”

“I think I shall go to
Leatherhead, for my wife was there.”

“You are the artilleryman who came into my garden.”

“Good luck!”

And after they went away I got off towards Walton across
the fields.

“Since I crawled out——”

“They’ve gone away across London,” he said.

“I guess they’ve got a
bigger camp there.

“If they can do that they will
simply go round the world.”

And they’ve
made their footing good and crippled the greatest power in the world.

There’s the ants builds their cities, live
their lives, have wars, revolutions, until the men want them out of the
way, and then they go out of the way.

I went for the Martians like a
sparrow goes for man.

“No doubt lots who had money have gone away to France,” he said.

All that will
go.

A Martian has only to go a few miles to get a
crowd on the run.

They’re making their things—making all the things they couldn’t bring
with them, getting things ready for the rest of their people.

And instead of our rushing about blind, on
the howl, or getting dynamite on the chance of busting them up, we’ve
got to fix ourselves up according to the new state of affairs.

If you’ve got any drawing-room manners or a dislike to eating peas with
a knife or dropping aitches, you’d better chuck ’em away.

“You mean——”

“I mean that men like me are going on living—for the sake of the breed.

And if I’m not mistaken, you’ll
show what insides _you’ve_ got, too, before long.

We aren’t going to be
exterminated.

I’m going on, under their feet.

I’ve got it planned; I’ve
thought it out.

We’ve got to
learn before we’ve got a chance.

And we’ve got to live and keep
independent while we learn.

“Great God!” cried I.

“I’ve thought it out, eh?”

“Go on,” I said.

Mind you, it isn’t all of us that are made for wild
beasts; and that’s what it’s got to be.

All these—the sort of people that lived in
these houses, and all those damn little clerks that used to live down
_that_ way—they’d be no good.

Well,
the Martians will just be a godsend to these.

Now whenever things
are so that a lot of people feel they ought to be doing something, the
weak, and those who go weak with a lot of complicated thinking, always
make for a sort of do-nothing religion, very pious and superior, and
submit to persecution and the will of the Lord.

No human being——”

“What’s the good of going on with such lies?” said the artilleryman.

I could find nothing to bring against
this man’s reasoning.

In the days before the invasion no one would have
questioned my intellectual superiority to his—I, a professed and
recognised writer on philosophical themes, and he, a common soldier;
and yet he had already formulated a situation that I had scarcely
realised.

We have to invent
a sort of life where men can live and breed, and be sufficiently secure
to bring the children up.

The tame ones will go like all tame beasts;
in a few generations they’ll be big, beautiful, rich-blooded,
stupid—rubbish!

The risk is that we who keep wild will go
savage—degenerate into a sort of big, savage rat. . . .

We’re not going to pick up any
rubbish that drifts in.

Weaklings go out again.”

“As you meant me to go?”

“Well—I parleyed, didn’t I?”

“We won’t quarrel about that.

Go on.”

“Those who stop obey orders.

That’s how we shall save the race.

We must go to the British Museum and pick
all those books through.

Some of us must go as spies.

As we worked, I turned his project over in
my mind, and presently objections and doubts began to arise; but I
worked there all the morning, so glad was I to find myself with a
purpose again.

After working an hour I began to speculate on the
distance one had to go before the cloaca was reached, the chances we
had of missing it altogether.

I was for going on, and after a little hesitation he resumed his spade;
and then suddenly I was struck by a thought.

“One night last week,” he said, “some fools got the electric light in
order, and there was all Regent Street and the Circus ablaze, crowded
with painted and ragged drunkards, men and women, dancing and shouting
till dawn.

From that, in answer to my questions, he came round to his grandiose
plans again.

And I noted that now there was no question that
he personally was to capture and fight the great machine.

Great God!

I
resolved to leave this strange undisciplined dreamer of great things to
his drink and gluttony, and to go on into London.

He was as black as a sweep with the black dust, alive, but
helplessly and speechlessly drunk.

I got
food—sour, hard, and mouldy, but quite eatable—in a baker’s shop here.

Going on towards Brompton, the streets were quiet
again.

A
jeweller’s window had been broken open in one place, but apparently the
thief had been disturbed, and a number of gold chains and a watch lay
scattered on the pavement.

I had half a mind to break into the Natural
History Museum and find my way up to the summits of the towers, in
order to see across the park.

The voice grew
stronger and stronger, though I could see nothing above the housetops
on the north side of the park, save a haze of smoke to the northwest.

My mind ran on old friends
that I had forgotten for years.

I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears, “Ulla, ulla,
ulla, ulla.”

It was now dusk, and after I had routed out some biscuits
and a cheese in the bar—there was a meat safe, but it contained nothing
but maggots—I wandered on through the silent residential squares to
Baker Street—Portman Square is the only one I can name—and so came out
at last upon Regent’s Park.

I turned back away from the park and
struck into Park Road, intending to skirt the park, went along under
the shelter of the terraces, and got a view of this stationary, howling
Martian from the direction of St. John’s Wood.

I could
not bring myself to go on.

And I would
save myself even the trouble of killing myself.

And scattered about it, some in
their overturned war-machines, some in the now rigid handling-machines,
and a dozen of them stark and silent and laid in a row, were the
Martians—_dead_!—slain by the putrefactive and disease bacteria against
which their systems were unprepared; slain as the red weed was being
slain; slain, after all man’s devices had failed, by the humblest
things that God, in his wisdom, has put upon this earth.

For a moment I
believed that the destruction of Sennacherib had been repeated, that
God had repented, that the Angel of Death had slain them in the night.

The one had died, even as it had been
crying to its companions; perhaps it was the last to die, and its voice
had gone on perpetually until the force of its machinery was exhausted.

All about the pit, and saved as by a miracle from everlasting
destruction, stretched the great Mother of Cities.

And as I looked at this wide expanse of houses and factories and
churches, silent and abandoned; as I thought of the multitudinous hopes
and efforts, the innumerable hosts of lives that had gone to build this
human reef, and of the swift and ruthless destruction that had hung
over it all; when I realised that the shadow had been rolled back, and
that men might still live in the streets, and this dear vast dead city
of mine be once more alive and powerful, I felt a wave of emotion that
was near akin to tears.

At the thought I extended my hands
towards the sky and began thanking God.

With overwhelming force came the thought of myself, of my wife, and the
old life of hope and tender helpfulness that had ceased for ever.

I remember, clearly and coldly and vividly, all
that I did that day until the time that I stood weeping and praising
God upon the summit of Primrose Hill.

One man—the first—had gone to St. Martin’s-le-Grand,
and, while I sheltered in the cabmen’s hut, had contrived to telegraph
to Paris.

All the shipping in the world seemed
going Londonward in those days.

Save for the expression of the faces, London seemed a city
of tramps.

The vestries were indiscriminately distributing bread sent
us by the French government.

I got a compartment to myself, and sat with folded arms,
looking greyly at the sunlit devastation that flowed past the windows.

The line on the London side of Woking station was still undergoing
repair, so I descended at Byfleet station and took the road to Maybury,
past the place where I and the artilleryman had talked to the hussars,
and on by the spot where the Martian had appeared to me in the
thunderstorm.

Here, moved by curiosity, I turned aside to find, among a
tangle of red fronds, the warped and broken dog cart with the whitened
bones of the horse scattered and gnawed.

Then I returned through the pine wood, neck-high with red weed here and
there, to find the landlord of the Spotted Dog had already found
burial, and so came home past the College Arms.

The smashed bushes were just as I had left them
nearly four weeks ago.

I remembered my inability to fix my mind that morning,
scarcely a month gone by, and how I had broken off to get my _Daily
Chronicle_ from the newsboy.

There were the mutton and
the bread, both far gone now in decay, and a beer bottle overturned,
just as I and the artilleryman had left them.

I cannot but regret, now that I am concluding my story, how little I am
able to contribute to the discussion of the many debatable questions
which are still unsettled.

Spectrum analysis of the black powder
points unmistakably to the presence of an unknown element with a
brilliant group of three lines in the green, and it is possible that it
combines with argon to form a compound which acts at once with deadly
effect upon some constituent in the blood.

A question of graver and universal interest is the possibility of
another attack from the Martians.

Seven months ago now, Venus and Mars were in alignment with the sun;
that is to say, Mars was in opposition from the point of view of an
observer on Venus.

We have
learned now that we cannot regard this planet as being fenced in and a
secure abiding place for Man; we can never anticipate the unseen good
or evil that may come upon us suddenly out of space.

Be
that as it may, for many years yet there will certainly be no
relaxation of the eager scrutiny of the Martian disk, and those fiery
darts of the sky, the shooting stars, will bring with them as they fall
an unavoidable apprehension to all the sons of men.

I go out into the Byfleet Road, and vehicles pass me, a
butcher boy in a cart, a cabful of visitors, a workman on a bicycle,
children going to school, and suddenly they become vague and unreal,
and I hurry again with the artilleryman through the hot, brooding
silence.

I go to London and see the busy multitudes in Fleet Street and the
Strand, and it comes across my mind that they are but the ghosts of the
past, haunting the streets that I have seen silent and wretched, going
to and fro, phantasms in a dead city, the mockery of life in a
galvanised body.

You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research.

There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works.

The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.

However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form.

Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.

To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

