The Scouring of the Shire

the Big Folk

beat the bounds

I says to him. „Cabbages and potatoes are better for me and you. Don ll land in trouble too big for you,

I am glad to find you visible,‟ replied the wizard, sitting down in a chair,

No secrets between us, Frodo,

I don‟t care,” said Deagol.

What had it got in its pocketses?” he said.

t use it!

s only just gone. I

See, lads,” he said,

Good-day to you!” I says, going out to him. Be off!” I said. Baggins has left,” he answered in a whisper. No you won‟t,” I said.

Speed now, fair guests! And to Frodo she said:

down under Hill

Come on! Follow me! Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don Hoy! Frodo! Hoy! Where are you? Where are you?

s feet; and there was Tom Come, friend Frodo!

What in the name of wonder? He clutched at his breast. he said, opening his eyes. Dressed up like this, sir? Where are my clothes? What do you mean? Here are your ponies, now!

Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from? re on your own legs trying to trot beside them. ve got things to do, free to all finders, birds, beasts. Elves or Men, and all kindly creatures Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people, Few now remember them,

Well, here we are again at last! I suppose we haven Do you think, do you think we may be pursued, tonight? No, I hope not tonight,

t deny I

What do you want, and where do you come from? We are making for the inn here, Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what Your business is your own, no doubt, We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and to stay at the inn here, All right, all right! I meant no offence. But you

ll find you We surely aren s wrong with the inn? Tom Bombadil recommended it. I expect it Half a minute, if you please! Good evening, little master! What may you be wanting? Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies, if that can be managed. Are you Mr. Butterbur? s right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service! You Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir? Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck, and this is Sam Gamgee. My name is Underhill. s gone again! But it m run off my feet; but I Where are you, you woolly-footed slow-coach? Nob!

Coming, sir! Coming! Well, now, what was I going to say? m that busy tonight, my head is going round. There s a travelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening. And now there t hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But we ll be comfortable. You t doubt. As soon as may be. This way now! Here is a nice little parlour! I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I t get thinner. I t come, ring and shout! Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters? he said, standing at the door. Mind yourself! Don t forget that it is safer indoors!

Old Barliman here If room isn ll find it for themselves. They Who is that? ve never heard: but he t tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there

I am called Strider, Well, Master Underhill, t, you may think, You had better do something quick! shouted all the others.

s after three!

s old Barley? d have a dance.

Oh yes, you do, A matter of some importance – to us both, ll talk to you later. I saw him, Mr. Butterbur, or leastways I didn Yes I do! And I mean what I say, what s some mistake somewhere, Well, where is he now? How should I know? He

s Mr. Took, now: he Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn And I say there Of course there t vanished. Here I am! I I am very sorry to have caused any trouble, All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you d best warn folk beforehand – and warn me . We t take to it all of a sudden. ve seen to a thing or two, I

Who are you, and what do you want? I am called Strider, You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe, But, of course, I have my price. What do you mean? And what will that be, pray? No more than you can afford,

Just this: you must take me along with you, until I wish to leave you. Go on then! What do you know? Too much; too many dark things, But as for your business – I have quick ears, said Frodo angrily, I shall take more care of the secret than you do. And care is needed! Watch every shadow! It would have been better, Do you think he– No, I don Frodo gave him a puzzled look. said Strider with a curl of his lip and a queer gleam in his eye. It was sheer accident! Accident, then. That accident has made your position dangerous. Hardly more than it was already, You must not count on that! And there are some folk in Bree who are not to be trusted,

What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him? News of you, of course, With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I s plain, and more than I like; but it The lesson in caution has been well learned, ve come to bid you good night, s like this, ll admit; and I And what has that got to do with me? Ah! you know best,

A stout little fellow with red cheeks, He said it? And who was he? Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is, but he t know what he t wonder. He t be undone. Well, what have you done? Where was I? ve only to name it , I said. I s addressed plain enough, A letter for me from Gandalf! Then your right name is Baggins? s what you came to tell me, I suppose, though you re right, master, m mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say, if harm comes of it. But I didn m a busy man. I What do you mean? These black men, d had bite or sup, he did. s here with my leave, He came to offer me his help. Well, you know your own business, maybe, But if I was in your plight, I wouldn

Then who would you take up with? Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn But why can d like to know? m sorry I can They come from Mordor, Are you still willing to help me? More than ever. Though I don Against the Shadow in the East, ll do that, s here without help from me, I Well, we can only hope the Riders won I hope not, indeed, But spooks or no spooks, they won t you worry till the morning. Nob In any case we must be called at dawn, said the landlord. s your Mr. Brandybuck? I am afraid he is out. He said something about going for a breath of air. Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on a holiday! I must go and bar the doors quick, but I When are you going to open that letter? s. Inside, written in the wizard

He has been doing that for many years, s friend at once? Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now? he added with a queer laugh, They are – at first sight at any rate, That you are a stout fellow,

But I am the real Strider, fortunately, I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will. Did the verses apply to you then? s letter, if you have never seen it? I did not know, But I am Aragorn, and those verses go with that name. When did you last see Gandalf? I do not know, Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it – with Gandalf I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except the Enemy himself, I am sorry,

Which way did it go? This is a friend of Gandalf It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward, You have a stout heart, but it was foolish. I found him, sir, I am afraid that t remember. I went to pieces. I don What will happen? Will they attack the inn? No, I think not, We seem to have enemies all round, What are we to do? We shall see, Let us hope to hold the fort till morning. Good night to you,

Jumped over the Moon! I hope so,

Open, in the name of Mordor!

No, no, no! No, not me! I haven Never has such a thing happened in my time! Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen, As much as we must,

I can carry enough for two, t anything be done, Mr. Butterbur? I doubt it, t be for sale. But I There is one crumb of comfort, s get hold of Nob! A poor old half-starved creature it is, but he won re placed, not if I knows Bill Ferny. t there some trick? Wouldn If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house, But it appeared that he was nobody

ll miss them both before long. Off early? Found some friends at last? Morning, my little friends! I suppose you know who you s Stick-at-naught Strider, that is! Though I t go ill-treating my poor old pony! Pah! And you, Ferny, Waste of a good apple, Not a "short cut", I hope, Ah, but you had not got me with you then, My cuts, short or long, don

Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain, though I don I am being eaten alive! Midgewater! There are more midges than water! What do they live on when they can I do not know, That is Weathertop,

What do you mean? I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It is close to the Road. But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there? What do you advise us to do? Do not speak of such things! I wonder who made this path, and what for,

No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills, Who was Gil-galad? s all I know, He did not make it up, There was a lot more, all about Mordor. I didn Going to Mordor! I hope it won Do not speak that name so loudly!

Well, here we are! There seems to he a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes, The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches, What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them? I should say, I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they may mean, How far is Rivendell? s journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road. A lot may happen in that time.

What is it? I do not know, but I fear the worst, The enemy is here! I wonder if old Gandalf has been here, It is just as I feared, t we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider? t like this hole: it makes my heart sink somehow. Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once, Can the Riders see? I was too careless on the hill-top,

he added, and his voice sank to a whisper, Is there no escape then? There is still hope, here we are There is food in the wild, Tell us of Gil-galad, Do you know any more of that old lay that you spoke of? I do indeed, So also does Frodo, for it concerns us closely. I know only the little that Gandalf has told me, Then tell us some other tale of the old days, I will tell you the tale of Tinuviel,

Did you see anything? No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn I saw something, Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!

What has happened? Where is the pale king? I am not a Black Rider, Sam, Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm! I think I understand things better now, There seem only to have been five of the enemy. Why they were not all here, I don

Sam choked with tears. And more deadly to Frodo was this! I think now,

s march was over Frodo What is that other river we can see far away there? That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell, I can see no sign of the enemy,

Who lives in this land? And who built these towers? Is this troll-country? Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty and forgetful? The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past, Have you often been to Rivendell?

We have come too far to the north, We cannot go any further, We shall see, What is the matter with my master? His wound was small, and it is already closed. There Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy, We must make for the Road again,

Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one! There is no need, I think, There are trolls! We will come and look at them, Get up, old stone! I had no idea we were anywhere near the place! You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew about trolls,

s nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a live troll!

t somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high? Not since Weathertop, t worry about me! I feel much better, but I don Come on, Sam! s more stored in your head than you let on about.

t need his shinbone. leave should go makin For a couple o m tired o ve a mind to dine on thee now. t care, and he ve never heard those words before. s out of his own head, of course, s a jester. He

I hope not, That must be the stone that marked the place where the trolls s share, I wonder, Frodo? None at all, That does not sound like a Black Rider This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of Elrond, Hail, and well met at last! Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell? No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,

My master is sick and wounded, There are evil things written on this hilt, You shall ride my horse, No, he will not! I doubt very much,

Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river, Fly! The enemy is upon us! Ride forward! Ride!

Ride on! Ride on! s edge below, and Frodo Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow me no more! Come back! Come back! To Mordor we will take you! The Ring! The Ring! By Elbereth and Luthien the Fair,

Where am I, and what is the time? clock in the morning. And are the others all right? Yes, they are all safe and sound, What happened at the Ford? It all seemed so dim somehow; and it still does. Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade, You seem to know a great deal already, You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo, We should never have done it without Strider, I was delayed, I wish you would tell me what happened!

All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything today, by Elrond But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are quite as tiring, You will soon hear all you wish to know, Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey, Then you knew of the Riders already-before I met them? I have heard all about Sam, He has no more doubts now. I am glad, t know much about Men in the Shire, except perhaps the Breelanders. Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old Kings? I thought they had all vanished long ago. I thought he was only a Ranger. Only a Ranger! I suppose not, I have been reckoning, and I can You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you, t feel at all: which is an improvement, but I can move my arm again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,

t be alarmed! What would they have done to me? What were the Riders trying to do? Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger! Yes, fortune or fate have helped you, They were terrible to behold! But why could we all see their horses? What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?

Still that must be expected, You look splendid, And is that the end of the Black Riders? Who made the flood? Elrond commanded it, Yes, it all comes back to me now, Well, there are many reasons why they should,

Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a looking-glass, But now for a merry meeting! I am ready, s go and look for the rest of the party! I can take you to them, sir, m getting to know some of the ways of the place. I know what you have been doing, Sam, s content. Come on, guide me round the corners! Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that, I feel like singing myself, That will soon be cured, More than meal! A feast!

Welcome and well met! Gloin at your service, Frodo Baggins at your service and your family Thank you very much, You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,

I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet, But I am equally curious, he added with a shake of his head; And what of your own people? There is much to tell, good and bad, And what has become of Balin and Ori and Oin? We have done well, s sides! Then you would see that we have not been idle. I will come and see them, if ever I can, You were very fond of Bilbo were you not? I would rather see him than all the towers and palaces in the world.

This is the Hall of Fire Awake little master, Hullo, Frodo my lad! t I been allowed to see you before? What were you doing? He shall be found, I got here without much adventure, t really good enough for Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn

Have you got it here? ve heard. I should very much like just to peep at it again. answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. Well, I should just like to see it for a moment, s face and passed his hand across his eyes. s any good trying to finish my book? But don s worry about it now – let Ah, there you are at last, Dunadan! You seem to have a lot of names. Well, Strider is one that I haven They call me that in Bree, and that is how I was introduced to him. And why do you call him Dunadan? Where have you been, my friend? Why weren Well, my dear fellow, s go off into a corner and polish it up! Let me hear it!

Now we had better have it again, I am flattered, Lindir, Not too tiring for you, It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals If you can re as different as peas and apples. Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,

he said in a low voice. t often get asked for a second hearing. What did you think of it? I am not going to try and guess, t understand that it was really you speaking until near the end. It is difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it, Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and go as you like, as long as you don It is a song to Elbereth, Begging your pardon, but I was just wondering if you would be wanting anything. And begging yours, Sam Gamgee, Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got up today for the first time.

Quite right, Sam,

Hullo! Good morning! Feel ready for the great council? I feel ready for anything, You may have a chance later,

It is now many years ago, For Sauron knows, that one of these was known to you on a time. such was his word, I say neither yea nor nay. I must consider this message and what it means under its fair cloak.

Consider well, but not too long, The time of my thought is my own to spend, For the present, You have done well to come, But I thought,

So it was indeed, So that is what became of the Ring! This I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother,

Give me leave, Master Elrond,

And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you, And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith? He is Aragorn son of Arathorn, Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all! It does not belong to either of us, Bring out the Ring, Frodo! s eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith , I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaning of a riddle,

I made that up myself, For my part I forgive your doubt, But now the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur s Bane is found, you say, I have seen a bright ring in the Halfling That shall be told, But not yet, I beg, Master! I had not named you, – he looked sidelong at Gloin – Well told, my friend,

You would have made a good story of it, if they hadn Yes, it made quite a long tale, You speak for me also, The Wise may have good reason to believe that the halfling The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together, At the worst, There I was at fault, We were all at fault,

From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew, s heir should labour to repair Isildur The Nine, the Seven, and the Three,

Some in the North, maybe, But in that time also he made this scroll, There is little need to tell of them, Yes, long and weary,

And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again, He is in prison, but no worse, Not through lack of watchfulness, You were less tender to me,

Well, well, he is gone, And now I will answer Galdor Your information was correct, I have an urgent errand, My news is evil. The enemy must have some great need or purpose, What do you mean? I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news of a land called Shire. Who told you, and who sent you? Saruman the White,

I will go to Saruman, Then you must go now , Stay a moment! I will do that, So you have come, Gandalf, Yes, I have come, I have come for your aid, Saruman the White. Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey ! But if I am not deceived, That may be so, The Nine have come forth again, Radagast the Brown! I liked white better,

In which case it is no longer white, You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you take for friends, And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper! And why not, Gandalf? Until what end? That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,

I saw you! It was only a dream Then it was late in coming, That was the undoing of Saruman How far can you bear me? Then I must have a steed on land, Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan sits in his halls, Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? They pay a tribute of horses, Then he must be a noble beast indeed,

Nor is it now, I will swear, The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands, Not this at least, Worst is a bad word, and I hope you do not live to see it. Butterbur they call him, What did you do to him? t be afraid! Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir, "Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!" said I. "It

This is grievous news concerning Saruman, He would not have come, Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help? No, I should not put it so,

But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him, But in any case, I know little of Iarwain save the name, I have not the strength, neither have they. Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by strength But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craft that we here possess, Then, said Glorfindel, Not safe for ever, And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea, Long yet will that march be delayed, And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine, None here can do so, I do not understand all this,

So be it, Who can tell? But we will put it to the test one day. May the day not be too long delayed, Then be comforted, Still it might be well for all, Balin will find no ring in Moria, Did you not hear me, Gloin? But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed as you counsel? We know not for certain,

Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance, Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring, Despair, or folly? At least for a while, Very well, very well, Master Elrond! Of course, my dear Bilbo, I have never known you give me pleasant advice before. The messengers who are sent with the Ring. I will take the Ring, though I do not know the way. If I understand aright all that I have heard,

But you won

s most unfair, s what I meant, Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took! Then what were you all doing? You were shut up for hours. You were wrong, ll just wait long enough for winter to come.

t wait now till spring; and you can I am afraid it will, I thought they were all destroyed in the flood, You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that, How long do you think I shall have here? Oh, I don t count days in Rivendell, Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant, Oh, that won It will do well, if it ever comes to that, And where will they live? That

Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least, The time has come, I will go with Sam. Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel, I ask leave once again to be your companion, Frodo. I would have begged you to come, There remain two more to be found, But that will leave no place for us! That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what lies ahead, Neither does Frodo,

You speak gravely, Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send me home tied in a sack, For otherwise I shall follow the Company. Let it be so then. You shall go, Here is your sword, But it was broken, you know. I took it to keep it safe but I t you know? This is Sting, Take it, if you like. I shan Also there is this! s a pretty thing, isn said Bilbo, moving it in the light. I should look – well, I don Just what I said myself, Very well, I will take it, Just a plain hobbit you look,

I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our past kindnesses, You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,

Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills, Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir, That animal can nearly talk, t let me go with you, Sam, I Bill, my lad, ll want it, if you haven ll want it. I can he said in a low voice. Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens, but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has not seen the nightfall. Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,

Or break it, Good... good luck! s side and looked out under his hand. Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,

But the mountains are ahead of us, We must have turned eastwards in the night. Yes I did, sometimes, but I don I need no map, It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making, Dark is the water of Kheled-zaram, May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf! Yes, and where then? To the end of the journey – in the end, That is true, What is the matter, Strider? But what do you guess is the reason?

I hope that is it, s that, Strider? It don Lie flat and still! And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate, Luckily our fire made little smoke, and had burned low before the crebain came, It must be put out and not lit again. Well if that isn Well, you can go on looking forward, Too warm, I shouldn muttered Sam to Frodo. m beginning to think it Maps conveyed nothing to Sam

Did you see anything pass over? No, but I felt it, whatever it was, It may be nothing, only a wisp of thin cloud. It was moving fast then, and not with the wind. Winter deepens behind us, I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, Gandalf, Who knows indeed! We must decide before we go further, Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest and sleep, From signs that we have seen lately, I will add a word of advice, if I may, And Bill could take a bit more, couldn

panted Sam just behind. That I feared it too, I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy, His arm has grown long indeed, His arm has grown long,

We cannot go further tonight, I do call it the wind, Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack, But what can we do? Either stop where we are, or go back, And it is no good going back while the storm holds, If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof make a house. s voice speaking. I don This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf, Give them this,

What do you say to fire? You may make a fire, if you can, If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them, The night is getting old, The dawn is not far off. If any dawn can pierce these clouds, The snow is growing less, and the wind is quieter. Caradhras has not forgiven us. If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a path for you, If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save us, But I must have something to work on. I cannot burn snow. Then let us force a path thither, you and I!

I go to find the Sun! Ah, it is as I said, But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you, But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through the drift? Cling to my back! I shall need my arms, We are departing as quickly as we may!

The birds again! That cannot be helped now,

We cannot, of course, go on again tonight, And then where are we to go? We still have our journey and our errand before us, I wish I was back there, You are right, Frodo, s hand again. Then we must go on, if there is a way, There is a way that we may attempt, If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil indeed, The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria, The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it will lead through Moria? It is a name of ill omen,

Things have changed since you came north, Boromir, We do not know what he expects, You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to the stronghold of Sauron, I will tread the path with you, Gandalf! I too once passed the Dimrill Gate, And I don Of course not! I will not go, s voice surely should be heard? I do not wish to go to Moria, I do not wish to go,

How the wind howls! Need we wait until morning then? How far is Moria? Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can, I wish I had taken Elrond muttered Pippin to Sam. ll wager it isn Listen, Hound of Sauron! Fling fuel on the fire!

Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth! What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin? It is as I feared, We must reach the doors before sunset, There it lies, I do not know which to hope, Ah! Here it is at last!

Indeed things have changed! There are the Walls of Moria, We must find a way round the northern edge, But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines, Poor old Bill! I am sorry,

Well, here we are at last! It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned, I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves, I have heard both, But you can s flat. After he has come so far and all! I am sorry, Sam, d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon It will be short of murder, I hope, Go with words of guard and guiding on you, Well, here we are and all ready, but where are the Doors? I can

Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut, But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves, Can you see anything now?

There are the emblems of Durin! And there is the Tree of the High Elves! And the Star of the House of Feanor, What does the writing say? I thought I knew the elf-letters but I cannot read these. The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth in the Elder Days,

What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter ? That is plain enough, But do not you know the word, Gandalf? Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot? The answer to your first question, Boromir, he added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, What are you going to do then? Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took, Do not let him run away!

Why did you do that, Boromir? I hate this place, too, and I am afraid. I don t disturb it! l wish we could get away!

I was wrong after all,

Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick! s arm, collapsed on a step in the black darkness. I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot first touched the water, What was the thing, or were there many of them? I do not know, and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff! Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing, since we can It will not last much longer, I am afraid, How long is that going to take us? I cannot say,

Do not be afraid! I knew I t got it!

I have no memory of this place at all! I am too weary to decide, Poor old Bill! I wonder where he is. I hope those wolves haven said Aragorn to Merry. This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the three passages, That hole was plainly a well for the guards Fool of a Took! That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one, and I do not like it. It may have nothing to do with Peregrin

Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad, I know what is the matter with me, And in the watches I have made up my mind, I chose the right way, That is all that I shall venture on for the present,

There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time t live in these darksome holes surely? These are not holes,

I like that! Piles of jewels? Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? For mithril , I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard, I was on the edge of a dream.

I shall be glad, Which way shall we take? Yonder eastward arch?

It looks like a tomb,

These are Daeron BALIN SON OF FUNDIN LORD OF MORIA. He is dead then, I feared it was so.

It seems to be a record of the fortunes of Balin The Chamber of Records, I guess that is where we now stand. Well, I can read no more for a long way, except the word gold , and Durin

That would be Ori said Gimli, looking over the wizard I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand, It is grim reading, We cannot get out , Which way shall we go? Back to the hall, They are coming! We cannot get out, Slam the doors and wedge them!

Wait a moment! Do not close it yet! Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria? There are Orcs, very many of them, And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well, There is no sound outside here yet, One for the Shire! Now is the time! Let us go, before the troll returns!

Now is the last chance. Run for it! I am all right, I can walk. Put me down! I thought you were dead! We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! Do as I say! Swords are no more use here. Go! Well, well! That said the wizard struggling to his feet. It is getting hot!

I do not know, What about me? Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say, You take after Bilbo, that there is a light ahead. But it is not daylight. It is red. What can it be? There is some new devilry here,

Now for the last race! They did not expect this, The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and narrow. Lead the way, Gimli! A Balrog! A Balrog is come! Now I understand. What an evil fortune! And I am already weary. Over the bridge!

You cannot pass, You cannot pass! He cannot stand alone! I am with you, Gandalf! Come! I will lead you now! We must obey his last command. Follow me!

Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer, We must do without hope, Yonder is the Dimrill Stair, Or Caradhras less cruel, There he stands smiling in the sun!

There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zaram! May you have joy of the sight! But we cannot linger there.

That is Durin Be swift then! Come with me, Frodo! said the dwarf. O Kheled-zaram fair and wonderful! What did you see? Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises. Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other mountain-streams, There lie the woods of Lothlorien! My heart will be glad, even in the winter, I am sorry, Frodo!

Good luck, Sam! I am all right, Gently he stripped off Frodo Look, my friends! And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain, I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close in his little room, The mail is marvellously light,

Not a sound but the wind, What is it? If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world, Indeed deep in the wood they dwell, Is there no other way? What other fairer way would you desire? A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords, Say not unscathed , but if you say unchanged , then maybe you will speak the truth, Then lead on! But it is perilous.

Here is Nimrodel! Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel?

I cannot sing any more, But the Dwarves did not make the evil, I said not so; yet evil came, Then many of the Elves of Nimrodel

Your words bring good counsel, Gimli, I will climb up, Whatever it may be, Then dig a hole in the ground, Do not move or speak! Who are they, and what do they say? t you hear their voices? Yes, they are Elves, Sam hastily put his hand over his mouth. s face, and Sam

The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lorien, The eighth is a dwarf, But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dain Elrond himself chose him to be one of our companions, and he has been brave and faithful. said Haldir at last. You had no need of your burdens, I hope, if I do go to sleep in this bed-loft, that I shan Once I do get to sleep, ll drop off, if you take my meaning.

What is it? What are they doing? Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! There is one of my people yonder across the stream, though you may not see him.

Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see, I can walk this path, but the others have not this skill. Must they swim? The agreement was made without my consent, I do not doubt you, I will go forward free, You cannot go back,

I am an Elf and a kinsman here, Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!" I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do not lead us well, You will have no claim, Alas for the folly of these days! Folly it may seem, You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us, Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea! Not even to see fair Lothlorien?

he said, bowing low.

Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,

You feel the power of the Lady of the Galadhrim, Look this way first! There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,

Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,

Welcome to Caras Galadhon! Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel, I will go first,

Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire! Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from the North. Welcome Gimli son of Gloin! It is long indeed since we saw one of Durin Nay, there was no change of counsel, He turned to Haldir. We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose, Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended, Tell us now the full tale! It was a Balrog of Morgoth, Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams – I saw Durin

He would be rash indeed that said that thing, Your quest is known to us,

What did you blush for, Sam? I never thought no such thing, t got nothing on, and I didn Almost exactly what I felt myself; only, only well, I don And it seemed to me, too, To me it seemed exceedingly strange, but whatever came into my mind then I will keep there. Well, have a care! I do not feel too sure of this Elvish Lady and her purposes. Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!

No, I am afraid not, But that is the best I can do yet. Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you t do them justice by a long road. t bear to think of bringing the news to him.

What do you think of Elves now, Sam? I have indeed! And I reckon there re not all the same. Now these folk aren s made them, it s right down deep, where I can You can see and feel it everywhere, t miss Gandalf m finding fault. I ve never heard of a better land than this. It m beginning to feel that if we s the job that t reckon that these folk can do much more to help us, magic or no. It I am afraid that Here is the Mirror of Galadriel, What shall we look for, and what shall we see? Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal, ll have a peep, Lady, if you

s going on at home, ve been away. But there, like as not I Like as not, s only stars, as I thought, t. They didn d fell him ! s some devilry at work in the Shire, Then suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. t stay here, I must go home. They You cannot go home alone, I wish I had never come here, and I don ve seen turns out true, somebody Do you now wish to look, Frodo? Do you advise me to look?

I will look, s view. Doubt came into Frodo Do not touch the water!

I know what it was that you last saw, And what do you wish? That what should be shall be, You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel, Wise the Lady Galadriel may be, I pass the test, I will diminish, and go into the West and remain Galadriel. Let us return! In the morning you must depart for now we have chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing. I would ask one thing before we go, You have not tried,

d take his Ring. You d make some folk pay for their dirty work.

Now is the time, They all resolved to go forward, As for me, my way home lies onward and not back. That is true, but is all this Company going with you to Minas Tirith? We have not decided our course, If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way to Minas Tirith, But I am not the leader of the Company. I see that you do not yet know what to do, And one Hobbit! That is well,

All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before noon tomorrow, Good night, my friends! I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty, It would be folly to throw lives away, I mean, No more, no more! You have eaten enough already for a long day I thought it was only a kind of cram , such as the Dale-men make for journeys in the wild, So it is,

Indeed it is, All the same, we bid you spare the food, Are these magic cloaks? I do not know what you mean by that, I have returned from the Northern Fences,

What are these? They are made of hithlain , All is now ready for you. Enter the boats! But take care at first! Heed the words! We have come to bid you our last farewell,

Though you have been our guests, As you go down the water, Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith, Then I need say no more, Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell, We have drunk the cup of parting, Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your Company,

The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stained or broken even in defeat, Yet maybe this will lighten your heart, For the gifts that you have given me I thank you, For you little gardener and lover of trees, I have only a small gift. Here is set G for Galadriel, And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? Hear all ye Elves! There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,

Treasure it, Lady, And you, Ring-bearer, In this phial,

I have looked the last upon that which was fairest, Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless it be her gift.

And mighty big ones too! and they are black swans. How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! But we have not journeyed far south yet,

I had a funny dream an hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo, t a dream. Funny it was anyway. Well, what was it? That I won s boat; but I didn s more, it wasn t know. When I looked again, it wasn I said to myself: "dreaming again, Sam Gamgee," I said, and I said no more just then. But I m not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in your eyes Sam, I do; and I remember more too. I don

Yes, that is what I have feared for some time, s about it, s what I was leading up to. No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight. I luggage with eyes s what you said. There What is it? Or at least, so I guess.

What is that, Legolas? Is it, as I think, an eagle? We will not start until it is fully dark, Hoy there, Aragorn! Turn! Turn if you can! I am out of my reckoning, All together, paddle! Paddle! Or we shall be driven on the shoals. s hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry s doing, I said Sam to Frodo.

Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas! That was a mighty shot in the dark, my friend! But who can say what it hit? It was not a Balrog, What do you think? I think – No, I will not say, So it seems, s very strange, s out of its running, or I

And perhaps that was the way of it, Nay, time does not tarry ever, But the wearing is slow in Lorien, That should not have been said outside Lorien, not even to me, I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River any further, We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith, But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,

Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe, Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and the Orcs prowl on the east-shore, If you go forward, peril will grow with every mile, even if you find a path. Peril lies ahead on every southward road, All is well, That would not be easy, even if we were all Men, Yet such as we are we will try it, Aye, we will,

Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night, Let us rest as much as we can now, Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings! ll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river!

s son heir of Elendil, has nought to dread! Behold Tol Brandir!

Here we will rest tonight, Why are you waking? It is not your watch. I do not know, Are enemies at hand? Let us see what Sting may show, Not very near, and yet too near, it seems. I feared as much,

The day has come at last, Very well, Frodo son of Drogo, Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it

I was afraid for you, Frodo, You are kind, Are you sure that you do not suffer needlessly? I wish to help you. You need counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine? I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir, Warning? Warning against what? We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that they will not fail. No hope while the Ring lasts, Ah! The Ring! It is best that it should lie hidden,

As you wish. I care not, Were you not at the Council? So you go on, And they tell us to throw it away! Surely you see it, my friend? No, I am afraid, Then you will come to Minas Tirith? You misunderstand me, But you will come, at least for a while? You need rest before your venture, if go you must. Why are you so unfriendly? The Council laid it upon me to bear it. It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us, said Boromir in a softer voice.

What have I said? What have I done? Frodo, Frodo!

I will do now what I must, ll be hunting for me, He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think, s place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most. Grievous is our loss, And so should I,

And I too will go with him, It would be faithless now to say farewell. It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him, t we stop him? We must stop him, t agree to his going east. And he doesn t got to ask. He ought to know that if we can t leave him. Begging your pardon, cried Sam, looking worried. s not in this business. He s got to find the Cracks of Doom, if he can. But he s come to the point, he s what his trouble is. Of course he d be so terrified he s still too frightened to start. And he isn ll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That ll want to go alone. Mark my words! We ll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam, Stop him! Don Well, I wish Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back. and let us get it over, This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up? Where have you been, Boromir? Have you seen Frodo? Yes, and no, Is that all that you have to say? I will say no more yet. This is bad!

But he wouldn But where did he go? Where is he? s been away ages now. How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? Half an hour, maybe, An hour since he vanished! We must try and find him at once. Come on! Wait a moment! We shall all be scattered and lost, Come with me, Sam! Whoa, Sam Gamgee! t lying, that s hard, cruel hard. Think, if you can! He can t jump waterfalls. He Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! Up you come, Sam my lad! Now take my hand! Save me, Mr. Frodo! m drownded. I can Here it is. Don t let you go. Tread water and don Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam!

Oh, Mr. Frodo, that said Sam shivering. t a guessed right, where would you be now? Safely on my way. All alone and without me to help you? I couldn It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam, Not as certain as being left behind, But I am going to Mordor. I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I s the only way. Of course it is, But not alone. I t going. I ll need it. But you can Just hold on a moment, and I cried Sam eagerly. So all my plan is spoilt! It is no good trying to escape you. But I Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,

