It was almost a year later when I went on and so came to Lothlorien and the
Great River late in 1941.

Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time when they dwelt in the
upper vales of Anduin, between the eaves of Greenwood the Great and the Misty Mountains.

Why
they later undertook the hard and perilous crossing of the mountains into Eriador is no longer
certain.

Their own accounts speak of the multiplying of Men in the land, and of a shadow that fell
on the forest, so that it became darkened and its new name was Mirkwood.

Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had already become divided into three
somewhat different breeds: Harfoots, Stoors, and Fallohides.

The Harfoots were browner of skin,
smaller, and shorter, and they were beardless and bootless; their hands and feet were neat and
nimble; and they preferred highlands and hillsides.

The Stoors were broader, heavier in build; their
feet and hands were larger, and they preferred flat lands and riversides.

The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient times, and long lived in the foothills of
the mountains.

The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River Anduin, and were less shy of Men.

They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came
down the River Hoarwell.

In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains and the Mountains of Lune, the
Hobbits found both Men and Elves.

For it was in the one thousand six hundred and first year of the Third Age that the Fallohide
brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set out from Bree; and having obtained permission from the high king
at Fornost1, they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a great following of Hobbits.

They passed
over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been built in the days of the power of the North Kingdom,
and they took all the land beyond to dwell in, between the river and the Far Downs.

Indeed, even in the hilly regions and the older villages, such as Hobbiton or Tuckborough, or in the
chief township of the Shire, Michel Delving on the White Downs, there were now many houses of
wood, brick, or stone.

Indeed, the folk of the Marish, and of
Buckland, east of the River, which they afterwards occupied, came for the most part later into the
Shire up from south-away; and they still had many peculiar names and strange words not found
elsewhere in the Shire.

Three
Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen on the Tower Hills beyond the western marches.

Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small
boats with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim.

And as the days of the Shire
lengthened they spoke less and less with the Elves, and grew afraid of them, and distrustful of those
that had dealings with them; and the Sea became a word of fear among them, and a token of death,
and they turned their faces away from the hills in the west.

It is thus quite possible that he
learned of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on the south slopes of the hill.

With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment,
on a morning of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great treasure, the
dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in the East.

The party was assailed by Orcs in
a high pass of the Misty Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo
was lost for a while in the black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, as he groped in
vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the floor of a tunnel.

Bilbo went on down to the roots of the mountains, until he could
go no further.

At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the lower gates of the
mines, on the eastward side of the mountains.

The riches he had brought back
from his travels had now become a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old
folk might say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with treasure.

They lived on the Hill itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.

It beats me why any Baggins of
Hobbiton should go looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.‟
„And no wonder they‟re queer,‟ put in Daddy Twofoot (the Gaffer‟s next-door neighbour), „if
they live on the wrong side of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest.

„Not that the Brandybucks of Buck-land live in the Old
Forest; but they‟re a queer breed, seemingly.

They fool about with boats on that big river – and that
isn‟t natural.

And Mr. Drogo was staying at
Brandy Hall with his father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him
being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table); and he went out
boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a
child and all.

„All the top of your hill is full of tunnels packed
with chests of gold and silver, and jools, by what I‟ve heard.

And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill with a pony and some mighty big bags

and a couple of chests.

I don‟t doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn‟t enough to fill tunnels.

An odd-looking waggon laden with odd-looking
packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End.

Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through Hobbiton and right
up the hill.

The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts.

There
was a constant stream of them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank
you, I shall certainly come .

Many of them had indeed been ordered a year
before, and had come all the way from the Mountain and from Dale, and were of real dwarf-make.

There were fountains
of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; there were pillars of coloured fires that rose and
turned into eagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a
shower of yellow rain; there was a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air with a
yell like an embattled army, and came down again into the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot
snakes.

It shaped itself like
a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow at the summit.

I want to see mountains again, Gandalf, mountains ,
and then find somewhere where I can rest .

I want to see the wild country again before I die, and the
Mountains; but he is still in love with the Shire, with woods and fields and little rivers.

„If you don‟t let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down your hole and out through
the hill,‟ he said.

There he had
undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a river and come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end.

Frodo went tramping all over the Shire with them; but
more often he wandered by himself, and to the amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen
far from home walking in the hills and woods under the starlight.

He found himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild lands, and
strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his dreams.

He began to say to
himself: „Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one day.‟

The
ancient East-West Road ran through the Shire to its end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had
always used it on their way to their mines in the Blue Mountains.

Orcs were multiplying
again in the mountains.

He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up to the Northfarthing
for the hunting.

He walked home under the early stars through
Hobbiton and up the Hill, whistling softly and thoughtfully.

It fell into the Great River, Anduin, and vanished.

For Isildur was
marching north along the east banks of the River, and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by
the Orcs of the Mountains, and almost all his folk were slain.

„Long after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the Great River on the edge of
Wilderland a clever-handed and quiet-footed little people.

I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to
the fathers of the fathers of the Stoors, for they loved the River, and often swam in it, or made little
boats of reeds.

He was interested in
roots and beginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed under trees and growing plants; he
tunnelled into green mounds; and he ceased to look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or the
flowers opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward.

Then he let go of his line, for he thought he saw
something shining in the river-bed; and holding his breath he grabbed at it.

„He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hardness of the world, and he journeyed
up the River, till he came to a stream that flowed down from the mountains, and he went that way.

„But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far above the tops of the Misty Mountains, out of which
the stream came.

And he thought suddenly: “It would be cool and shady under those mountains.

The roots of those mountains must be roots indeed; there must
be great secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning.”

„So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a little cave out of which the
dark stream ran; and he wormed his way like a maggot into the heart of the hills, and vanished out
of all knowledge.

„All the “great secrets” under the mountains had turned out to be just empty night: there was
nothing more to find out, nothing worth doing, only nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.

After a year or two he left the
mountains.

He set out and came back
westward, as far as the Great River.

There is only one way: to find the Cracks of Doom in the depths of Orodruin, the
Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond the grasp
of the Enemy for ever.‟
„I do really wish to destroy it!‟ cried Frodo.

He was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery
Mountain.

When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.

„I heard a deal that I didn‟t rightly understand, about an
enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir, and dragons, and a fiery mountain, and – and Elves, sir.

He went out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the
path, and then on a short way down the Hill Road.

Good night to you!‟
Footsteps went away down the Hill.

Frodo wondered vaguely why the fact that they did not
come on up the Hill seemed a great relief.

We are not going through the village tonight.

At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gate opening on to a narrow
lane.

A mile or
two further south they hastily crossed the great road from the Brandywine Bridge; they were now in
the Tookland and bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill Country.

The night was clear, cool, and starry,
but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up the hill-sides from the streams and deep meadows.

It climbed away from the main road in the Water-valley, and
wound over the skirts of the Green Hills towards Woody-End, a wild corner of the Eastfarthing.

„If we get to the other side of this hill, we shall find a
spot that is sheltered and snug enough, sir.

Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of fir-wood.

„You had better go now.‟
„You can come too,‟ said Frodo, „and bring all the water-bottles.‟ There was a stream at the
foot of the hill.

They went down the slope, and across the stream
where it dived under the road, and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills;
and by that time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear already seemed a heavy burden.

They were
looking across the Woody End towards the Brandywine River.

It is high time for lunch.‟
He sat down on the bank at the side of the road and looked away east into the haze, beyond which
lay the River, and the end of the Shire in which he had spent all his life.

He
used often to say there was only one Road; that it was like a great river: its springs were at every
doorstep, and every path was its tributary.

Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through
Mirkwood, and that if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain or even further and to
worse places?”

The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was on the land as they went
down the hill.

The Gaffer is getting old, and more than a bit blind, and it must have been near dark when
this fellow come up the Hill and found him taking the air at the end of our Row.

The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and evening was coming on before
they came back to the road at the end of the long level over which it had run straight for some miles.

Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a
tune that was as old as the hills, and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the

Water-valley and talked about Adventure.

Hill and water under sky,
Pass them by!

They don‟t
live in the Shire, but they wander into it in Spring and Autumn, out of their own lands away beyond
the Tower Hills.

They bore no lights, yet as they walked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above
the rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet.

„For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall.

The woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and thicker; and as the
lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills, there were many deep brakes of hazel on the
rising slopes at either hand.

A green ride lay almost
unseen through the thickets on the right; and this they followed as it wound away back up the
wooded slopes on to the top of a shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower land of the
river-valley.

Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the
village of Woodhall.

Pippin fell
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock.

a hobbit walk from the Water to the River in peace?‟
„But it is not your own Shire,‟ said Gildor.

„But I hope to get across the river
without their seeing us.‟
„Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?‟
„Not much – only hints and riddles,‟ said Frodo evasively.

It isn‟t to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want – I don‟t rightly know
what I want: but I have something to do before the end, and it lies ahead, not in the Shire.

Their course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to their
left, and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side of the hills, until
they reached the flats beyond.

When they had struggled to the
bottom of the bank, they found a stream running down from the hills behind in a deeply dug bed
with steep slippery sides overhung with brambles.

The banks of the stream sank, as it reached the levels and became broader and shallower, wandering
off towards the Marish and the River.

Even as they sat and stood, as if suddenly frozen, it was
answered by another cry, fainter and further off, but no less chilling to the blood.

Away over the flats they could glimpse
the low hill of Bucklebury across the River, but it was now to their left.

The sun escaping from the
breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining brightly again.

The line of the River grew nearer; and the Black Riders began to
seem like phantoms of the woods now left far behind.

Too near the River,‟ he said, shaking his head.

Maybe there is some that want to know what has become
of the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?‟
Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were rather disconcerting.

The sun was
already behind the western hills, and the light was failing.

There was now no breath of wind stirring; the night
was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air.

Thin strands of river-mist were hanging
above the dikes, and crawling over the fields.

In a hundred yards or so it brought them to the river-bank, where there was a
broad wooden landing-stage.

Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds of mist,
shone many round windows, yellow and red.

Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one of the oldest in the Marish or
indeed in the Shire, had crossed the river, which was the original boundary of the land eastwards.

His family grew and grew, and
after his days continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the low hill, and had three
large front-doors, many side-doors, and about a hundred windows.

That was the origin
of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old Forest, a sort of colony from the
Shire.

Its chief village was Bucklebury, clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall.

It ran all the way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop curving away from the
river, to Haysend (where the Withywindle flowed out of the Forest into the Brandywine): well over
twenty miles from end to end.

The Forest drew
close to the hedge in many places.

Sam was the
only member of the party who had not been over the river before.

„Can horses cross

the river?‟
„They can go twenty miles north to Brandywine Bridge – or they might swim,‟ answered
Merry.

They passed
Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of
Buckland that ran south from the Bridge.

Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;
but better than rain or rippling streams
is Water Hot that smokes and steams.

I‟ve heard that he used to go into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the
reputation of knowing a good many strange things.

Though wind may blow and rain may fall,
We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.

„They could have reached here by now, of course, if they were not stopped at the
North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the river-bank, just this side of the Bridge.

The only thing to do is to go off
in a quite unexpected direction.‟
„But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!‟ said Fredegar horrified.

„But you won‟t have any luck in the Old Forest,‟ objected Fredegar.

„I am more afraid of the Old Forest than of
anything I know about: the stories about it are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not
going on the journey.

I am going into the Old Forest first thing tomorrow.‟

„On the whole I would rather have our job than Fatty‟s –
waiting here till Black Riders come.‟
„You wait till you are well inside the Forest,‟ said Fredegar.

At first he thought it was a great wind coming over the
leaves of the forest.

Chapter 6
The Old Forest
Frodo woke suddenly.

„I wish you were not going into the
Forest.

But good luck to you – today
and every day!‟
„If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be lucky,‟ said Frodo.

„You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and on the edge of the Old
Forest.‟
„Are the stories about it true?‟ asked Pippin.

But the Forest is queer.

But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of
trees, and made a great bonfire in the Forest, and burned all the ground in a long strip east of the
Hedge.

„There are various queer things living deep in the Forest, and on the far side,‟ said Merry, „or
at least I have heard so; but I have never seen any of them.

On the far side was a

faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a hundred yards and more beyond the Hedge; but
it vanished as soon as it brought them under the trees.

There was sky above them, blue and clear to their surprise, for
down under the Forest-roof they had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the
mist.

A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and cheerful garden after the close Forest.

They were still
climbing gently, but they now went much quicker, and with better heart; for it seemed to them that
the Forest had relented, and was going to let them pass unhindered after all.

Before them, but
some distance off, there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald head out of the encircling
wood.

They now hurried forward again, delighted with the thought of climbing out for a while above
the roof of the Forest.

The path dipped, and then again began to climb upwards, leading them at last
to the foot of the steep hillside.

The wood stood all
round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle round a shaven crown.

Near at hand the mist was now almost gone; though here and there it lay in
hollows of the wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep fold cutting right across the Forest, the
fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.

It comes down
out of the Downs and flows south-west through the midst of the Forest to join the Brandywine
below Haysend.

The Withywindle valley is said to be the queerest
part of the whole wood – the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.‟
The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out, but they could see little but mists
over the damp and deep-cut valley; and beyond it the southern half of the Forest faded from view.

The sun on the hill-top was now getting hot.

On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as if the slopes of the hill were
continued far down under the trees, like island-shores that really are the sides of a mountain rising
out of deep waters.

As the sun rose and passed noon they glimpsed far off in the east the
grey-green lines of the Downs that lay beyond the Old Forest on that side.

That cheered them
greatly; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyond the wood‟s borders, though they did not
mean to go that way, if they could help it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister a reputation in
hobbit-legend as the Forest itself.

The path that had brought them to the hill
reappeared on the northward side; but they had not followed it far before they became aware that it
was bending steadily to the right.

After some discussion they decided to leave this misleading path and strike northward; for although
they had not been able to see it from the hill-top, the Road must lie that way, and it could not be
many miles off.

They were being headed off, and were simply
following a course chosen for them – eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not
out of it.

Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook
growing strong and noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill.

In
the midst of it there wound lazily a dark river of brown water, bordered with ancient willows,
arched over with willows, blocked with fallen willows, and flecked with thousands of faded
willow-leaves.

This is the River Withywindle!

After a while he
reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground between the cliff-foot and the river; in
some places firm turf went down to the water‟s edge.

„What‟s more,‟ he said, „there seems to be
something like a footpath winding along on this side of the river.

If we turn left and follow it, we
shall be bound to come out on the east side of the Forest eventually.‟
„I dare say!‟ said Pippin.

I am getting very suspicious of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe all
the stories about it.

Here and there it passed over other rills, running down gullies into the
Withywindle out of the higher forest-lands, and at these points there were tree-trunks or bundles of
brushwood laid carefully across.

We must
get clear of the Forest first.‟

„Must bathe feet a minute.‟
Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the tree, where great winding
roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled dragonets straining down to drink.

Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern.

„Why did we ever come into this dreadful
Forest?

There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading outwards to the branches of all the other trees
round about, as though they had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river-valley and set
up ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest.

There was an answer, or so he thought; but it seemed to come from
behind him, away down the path further back in the Forest.

Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,
Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,
There my pretty lady is.

River-woman‟s daughter,
Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.

They thought of the slanting light of evening glittering on the Brandywine River, and
the windows of Bucklebury beginning to gleam with hundreds of lights.

White mists began to
rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the roots of the trees upon its borders.

In the darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where
the river flowed over a short fall.

They stepped out from the Forest, and found a wide sweep of grass welling up before them.

The river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily down to meet them, glinting here and there in
the light of the stars, which were already shining in the sky.

The eaves
of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge.

Down again the path went, and then up again, up a long smooth hillside of turf,
towards the light.

There was Tom Bombadil‟s house before them, up, down, under hill.

Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like the song of a glad water
flowing down into the night from a bright morning in the hills, came falling like silver to meet
them:
Now let the song begin!

Let us sing together
Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather,
Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,
Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather,
Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water:
Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter!

But before they could
say anything, she sprang lightly up and over the lily-bowls, and ran laughing towards them; and as
she ran her gown rustled softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river.

I am Goldberry,
daughter of the River.‟

Fair River-daughter!

„He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.‟
„Then all this strange land belongs to him?‟
„No indeed!‟ she answered, and her smile faded.

No one has ever caught old Tom walking
in the forest, wading in the water, leaping on the hill-tops under light and shadow.

For nothing passes
door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.

The sound of her footsteps was like a stream
falling gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night.

By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.

And that proved well for you – for now I shall no longer
go down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old.

Nor shall I be passing
Old Man Willow‟s house this side of spring-time,
not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter
dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water.

It seemed to Frodo that he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a
circle of hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a pinnacle of stone,
like a vast tower but not made by hands.

He seemed to hear or remember hearing: „Nothing passes doors or windows save
moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.‟ A little breath of sweet air moved the curtain.

Actually his view was screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise.

The Forest was hidden
under a fog.

The stream ran down the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows.

I have been
walking wide, leaping on the hilltops, since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet
grass underfoot, wet sky above me.

Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled.

They could hear few words, but
it seemed plain to them that the song was a rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the
tale of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below.

Frodo stood near the open door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and
go bubbling away down into the valley.

He told them tales of bees
and flowers, the ways of trees, and the strange creatures of the Forest, about the evil things and
good things, things friendly and things unfriendly, cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden
under brambles.

As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest, apart from themselves,
indeed to feel themselves as the strangers where all other things were at home.

It was not
called the Old Forest without reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten woods;
and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker than the hills, the fathers of the fathers of trees,
remembering times when they were lords.

But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow: his heart was
rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning, and a master of winds, and his song and
thought ran through the woods on both sides of the river.

His grey thirsty spirit drew power out of
the earth and spread like fine root-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till it
had under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest from the Hedge to the Downs.

They heard of the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and
the stone-rings upon the hills and in the hollows among the hills.

Sheep walked for a while biting the grass, but soon the
hills were empty again.

Even in the Shire the rumour of the Barrow-wights of the
Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been heard.

These four now suddenly remembered what the joy of
this house had driven from their minds: the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under the very shoulder
of those dreaded hills.

Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the
river and the trees; Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first acorn.

„The rain has ended,‟ she said; „and new waters are running downhill, under the stars.

After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs that began merrily in the
hills and fell softly down into silence; and in the silences they saw in their minds pools and waters
wider than any they had known, and looking into them they saw the sky below them and the stars
like jewels in the depths.

Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!

The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whistling like a tree-full of birds; and the
sun was already slanting down the hill and through the open window.

They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the house, and went slanting up
towards the north end of the hill-brow under which it sheltered.

There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair was
flying loose, and as it caught the sun it shone and shimmered.

They bowed, but with a wave
of her arm she bade them look round; and they looked out from the hill-top over lands under the
morning.

It was now as clear and far-seen as it had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the
knoll in the Forest, which could now be seen rising pale and green out of the dark trees in the West.

To the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was
a distant glint like pale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop in the lowlands and
flowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits.

Eastward the Barrow-downs rose, ridge behind ridge into the
morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it was no more than a guess of blue and a
remote white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky, but it spoke to them, out of memory and
old tales, of the high and distant mountains.

It seemed fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of
the downs towards the Road, when they should be leaping, as lusty as Tom, over the stepping stones
of the hills straight towards the Mountains.

He bowed low, and mounted his pony, and followed by
his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope behind the hill.

Tom Bombadil's house and the
valley, and the Forest were lost to view.

The air grew warmer between the green walls of hillside
and hillside, and the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed.

As they looked she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished
behind the hill.

Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet of a steep hill into
another deeper and broader valley, and then over the shoulder of further hills, and down their long
limbs, and up their smooth sides again, up on to new hill-tops and down into new valleys.

When they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest seemed to

be smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf and root and mould.

About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and flattened, like a shallow saucer
with a green mounded rim.

Beyond, there seemed to be no more hills.

But even as he spoke he turned his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills
were higher and looked down upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds, and
on some were standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of green gums.

There they took food and drink, and made as good
a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came from 'down under Hill'.

Riding over the hills, and eating their fill, the warm sun and the scent of turf, lying a little too
long, stretching out their legs and looking at the sky above their noses: these things are, perhaps,
enough to explain what happened.

The air was silent, heavy and chill.

They packed up as quickly as their
chilled fingers would work.

Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the rim and down the long northward
slope of the hill, down into a foggy sea.

On
either side ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they were at last
approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs.

He could not remember having seen any sign
of these in the valley, when he looked out from the hill in the morning.

He plunged off in the direction of the
call, and found himself going steeply uphill.

Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when he at last came to the top
of a ridge or hill.

He was weary, sweating and yet chilled.

A glance
showed him that he was now facing southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must have
climbed from the north.

Frodo was chilled to the marrow.

All at once back into his mind,
from which it had disappeared with the first coming of the fog, came the memory of the house
down under the Hill, and of Tom singing.

Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!

Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,
Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!

He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling.

Looking down after him Frodo saw him
running away southwards along the green hollow between their hill and the next, still whistling and
crying:
Hey! now!

He reappeared, hat first,
over the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an obedient line six ponies: their own five and
one more.

My four-legged friend; though I seldom ride him, and he wanders
often far, free upon the hillsides.

They led their ponies down the hill; and then mounting they trotted
quickly along the valley.

They looked back and saw the top of the old mound on the hill, and from it
the sunlight on the gold went up like a yellow flame.

'I suppose we haven't lost more than two days by
my short cut through the Forest!

Ever since they had entered the Forest they had thought chiefly of getting back to the
Road; only now when it lay beneath their feet did they remember the danger which pursued them,
and was more than likely to be lying in wait for them upon the Road itself.

They
stood silent, reluctant to make the final parting, and only slowly became aware that Tom was
wishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting.
'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that your own luck must go with
you and guide you): four miles along the Road you'll come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill,
with doors looking westward.

I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.'

Darkness came down
quickly, as they plodded slowly downhill and up again, until at last they saw lights twinkling some
distance ahead.

Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass against misty stars; and under its
western flank nestled a large village.

Chapter 9
At the Sign of The Prancing Pony
Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region, like an island in the
empty lands round about.

Besides Bree itself, there was Staddle on the other side of the hill, Combe
in a deep valley a little further eastward, and Archet on the edge of the Chetwood.

Lying round
Bree-hill and the villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland only a few miles broad.

They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards even as far as the Misty
Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen.

They lived mostly in Staddle though there were some in Bree
itself, especially on the higher slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men.

The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much; and the affairs of the four
villages were their chief concern.

The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the Big Folk, mostly above the Road,
nestling on the hillside with windows looking west.

On that side, running in more than half a circle
from the hill and back to it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the inner side.

There
was another gate in the southern comer where the Road ran out of the village.

Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the foot of the hill, there was a
large inn.

For Bree
stood at an old meeting of ways; another ancient road crossed the East Road just outside the dike at
the western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various sorts had travelled
much on it.

His
house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and inquisitive among the inhabitants, large and
small, of the four villages; and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers
(mostly dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.

It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his companions came at last to the
Greenway-crossing and drew near the village.

He might have arrived, while
they were delayed in the Forest and the Downs.

As soon
as his back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in over the gate and melted into the shadows
of the village street.

It had a front on the
Road, and two wings running back on land partly cut out of the lower slopes of the hill, so that at
the rear the second-floor windows were level with the ground.

My name is Underhill.'
'There now!' said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his fingers.

There were several Underhills from Saddle, and as they could not imagine sharing a name
without being related, they took Frodo to their hearts as a long-lost cousin.

Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the roof of the Town
Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had
been buried in chalk, and came out like a floured dumpling.

One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in the Shire
several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who they were related to.

Master –
Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'
'He did,' said Frodo stiffly.

'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider, 'if I were you, I should stop your young friends from
talking too much.

It was a harmless enough tale for most of the local hobbits, no doubt: just
a funny story about those funny people away beyond the River; but some (old Butterbur, for
instance) knew a thing or two, and had probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo's vanishing.

Some of the hobbits looked at Frodo and laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr.
Underhill had taken as much ale as was good for him.

There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,
And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his fill.

They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon,
While his horses galloped up in rear,
And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon.

The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.

There was too much of
that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air; or into thick air, as is more likely in this room.'
'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.

'Now
what have you been doing, Mr. Underhill?' he asked.

A most unfortunate accident.'
'All right, Mr. Underhill!

But before you go, I should like a word with you in private, Mr. Underhill.

I am Mr. Underhill, if
any name must be given .

But I may say that I know all the lands
between the Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I have wandered over them for many years.

'I won't give you away; but I was told that
this Baggins would be going by the name of Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you
well enough, if I may say so.'
'Indeed!

He'll be calling
himself Underhill.

'But why can't you stay here quiet for a bit, Mr. Underhill?

You can let Mr. Underhill stay here tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of
Baggins, till he is far away.'

Good night, Mr. Baggins – Underhill, I should
say!

What's that?'
'It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from here to Rivendell.

In the village.

And I made a nice imitation of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag –
Underhill, sir,' he added with a grin.

The Sickle was swinging
bright above the shoulders of Bree-hill.

Chapter 11
A Knife in the Dark
As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on Buckland; a mist strayed in the
dells and along the river-bank.

In the dark without moon or stars a drawn blade
gleamed, as if a chill light had been unsheathed.

It rent the night like fire on a
hill-top.

At last they got the idea that enemies were in
Buckland, some strange invasion from the Old Forest.

'Can't we get a couple of ponies in the
village, or even one just for the baggage?

But as they drew near to the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept
house behind a thick hedge: the last house in the village.

At last they left the village behind.

It bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet of Bree-hill,
and then it began to run swiftly downwards into wooded country.

To their left they could see some
of the houses and hobbit-holes of Staddle on the gentler south-eastern slopes of the hill; down in a
deep hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe
lay; Archet was hidden in the trees beyond.

After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill standing tall and brown
behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards the North.

His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the country, was to go towards
Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over
the wild lands to Weathertop Hill.

It is like lightning that leaps up
from the hill-tops.'

Away in the
distance eastward they could now see a line of hills.

Indeed, there are many birds and beasts in this country that could see us, as we stand
here, from that hill-top.

The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills.

'I think,' answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, 'I think the best thing is to go as
straight eastward from here as we can, to make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop.

At the day's end they came to a stream that wandered down from the hills to lose itself in the
stagnant marshland, and they went up along its banks while the light lasted.

Ahead there loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak and treeless backs of the hills.

The hills drew nearer.

It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed
chosen so as to keep as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of
the flats to the west.

There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,' answered Strider.

'The Men
of the West did not live here; though in their latter days they defended the hills for a while against
the evil that came out of Angmar.

It was burned and broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like
a rough crown on the old hill's head.

Of him the harpers sadly sing:
the last whose realm was fair and free
between the Mountains and the Sea.

It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of the path, and saw before
them, in the pale clear light of the October sun, a grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the
northward slope of the hill They decided to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad
Concealment was no longer possible, and they could only hope that no enemy or spy was observing
them.

Nothing was to be seen moving on the hill.

After half an hour's plodding climb Strider
reached the crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless.

About them the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the

grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but there was no sign of any
living thing.

Following its line eastward
with their eyes they saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them
stood taller shapes of grey, and behind those again were high white peaks glimmering among the
clouds.
'Well, here we are!' said Merry. '

I guess that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell.

They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward edge.

They could all see the black
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain; yet something told
them that there, far below, were Black Riders assembling on the Road beyond the foot of the hill.

Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill to find their companions.

Not far away they found a spring of clear water in the hillside, and near it footprints not
more than a day or two old.

There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearest to the hill.

All we could
do would be to go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills, where the land is
all much the same as it is here.

On the north side of the Road beyond the hills the
country is bare and flat for miles.'
'Can the Riders see?' asked Merry.

'I was too careless on the hill-top,' answered Strider.

Rangers passed at times beyond the hills, but they were few and did not stay.

Other
wanderers were rare, and of evil sort: trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleys of
the Misty Mountains.

There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.

Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;
And forth he hastened, strong and fleet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.

Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She tightly fled on dancing feet,
And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.

Her mantle glinted in the moon,
As on a hill-top high and far
She danced, and at her feet was strewn
A mist of silver quivering.

Long was the way that fate them bore,
O'er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.

And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.

But the
Enemy was victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril came over the
Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the forest of Neldoreth.

There he
beheld Luthien singing and dancing in a glade beside the enchanted river Esgalduin; and he named
her Tinuviel, that is Nightingale in the language of old.

The waxing moon was
climbing slowly above the hill that overshadowed them, and the stars above the hill-top faded.

Even as they did so, they saw on the top of the hill something small and
dark against the glimmer of the moonrise.

Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill intently.

I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.'
'I saw something,' said Merry; 'or I thought I did – away westwards where the moonlight was
falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black
shapes.

Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they felt, rather than saw, a
shadow rise, one shadow or more than one.

Frodo thought that he heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt a thin
piercing chill.

Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and a deadly chill was
spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side.

'These leaves,' he said, 'I have walked far to find; for this plant does not grow in the bare hills;
but in the thickets away south of the Road I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.'

They made their way slowly and cautiously round the south-western slopes of the hill, and
came in a little while to the edge of the Road.

Four days passed, without the ground or the scene changing much, except that
behind them Weathertop slowly sank, and before them the distant mountains loomed a little nearer.

Strider now turned their course again north-eastwards, and
on the sixth day they reached the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of
wooded hills.

Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round the feet of the hills; and to
their right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin sunshine.

In the distance they glimpsed yet another
river in a stony valley half-veiled in mist.

'We have now come
to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call Mitheithel.

There is no way over it below its sources in the
Ettenmoors, except by the Last Bridge on which the Road crosses.'
'What is that other river we can see far away there?'

'The Road runs along the
edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen.

One river at a time!

Here under the shadow of
the hills there had been some rain.

Here Strider turned aside, and soon they
were lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding among the feet of sullen hills.

As they went forward the hills about them steadily
rose.

He recalled Bilbo's account of his journey and the threatening towers on the hills north of
the Road, in the country near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had happened.

But that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the
land.'

The hills now began to shut them in.

The Road behind held on its way to the River Bruinen,
but both were now hidden from view.

The wind began to
blow steadily out of the West and pour the water of the distant seas on the dark heads of the hills in
fine drenching rain.

The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper before them, and they
were forced to turn away northwards out of their course.

That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock-wall behind them, in which there was a
shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff.

The cold and wet had made his wound
more painful than ever, and the ache and sense of deadly chill took away all sleep.

They found a passage between
two hills that led them into a valley running south-east, the direction that they wished to take; but
towards the end of the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark edge
against the sky was broken into many bare points like teeth of a blunted saw.

The wind blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down
moaning and sighing.

Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark wings were sweeping
by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought him in all the hollows of the hills.

If they went on,
down the further side of the ridge, they would have the Mountains on their left.

Some way ahead
Strider had caught a glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from
view, the Road to the Ford was not far from the River and lay on the side nearest to them.

'We cannot hope to find a path through these
hills.

When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake: there were clearly the
beginnings of a path, that climbed with many windings out of the woods below and faded away on
the hill-top behind.

Suddenly coming out of a belt of fir-trees it ran steeply down a slope, and
turned sharply to the left round the comer of a rocky shoulder of the hill.

There was a cave or rock-chamber behind, but in the gloom
inside nothing could be seen.

In a case in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.

Caveyard!

But harder than stone is the flesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.

As well set your boot to the mountain's root,
For the seat of a troll don't feel it.

At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and winding eastward among
woods and heather-covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains.

Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off
the light of the fast westering sun.

A cold wind flowed down to meet them from the mountains
ahead.

Two days ago I found it, and followed it over the Bridge; and
today I marked where you descended from the hills again.

But Frodo felt the chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth
crept down from his shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier.

Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even
7 The Brandywine River

Strider seemed by the sag of his shoulders to be weary.

'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,' said Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me
that the pursuit is now swift behind us, and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'

The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now in places much grass at
either side, in which the hobbits walked when they could, to ease their tired feet.

On the further side was a steep brown bank, threaded by a winding path;
and behind that the tall mountains climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into
the fading sky.

The Riders seemed to sit upon their great steeds like threatening statues
upon a hill, dark and solid, while all the woods and land about them receded as if into a mist.

At
the same moment the black horses leaped down the hill in pursuit, and from the Riders came a
terrible cry, such as Frodo had heard filling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away.

He felt the quick heave and surge as
the horse left the river and struggled up the stony path.

His enemies laughed at him with a harsh and chilling laughter.

Dimly Frodo saw the river below him rise, and down along its course there came a plumed
cavalry of waves.

Their piercing cries were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried
them away.

He was fully awake now, and the memory of his
journey was returning: the disastrous 'short cut' through the Old Forest; the 'accident' at The
Prancing Pony ; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop.

There they hastily kindled fire; for
Glorfindel knew that a flood would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have
to deal with any that were left on his side of the river.

The river of this valley is under his power, and it
will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the Ford.

There is
great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.'
'Yes, it all comes back to me now,' said Frodo, 'the tremendous roaring.

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into a high garden above
the steep bank of the river.

Shadows had fallen in the valley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains
far above.

Long she had been in the land of her mother's
kin, in Lorien beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her father's house.

'But I am equally curious,' he added, 'to learn
what brings so important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'

Frodo learned that
Grimbeorn the Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, and to their land between
the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
'Indeed,' said Gloin, 'if it were not for the Beornings, the passage from Dale to Rivendell
would long ago have become impossible.

He was interested, however, to hear that Dain
was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his two hundred and fiftieth
year), venerable, and fabulously rich.

Gloin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo about their great labours in
Dale and under the Mountain.

And the halls and
cavernous streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the terraces and towers upon the
Mountain's sides!

'I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the South, but hardly anything
from the Shire.

Then the enchantment became more and more
dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too
multitudinous for its pattern to be comprehended; it became part of the throbbing air about him, and
it drenched and drowned him.

From gnashing of the Narrow Ice
where shadow lies on frozen hills,
from nether heats and burning waste
he turned in haste, and roving still
on starless waters far astray
at last he came to Night of Naught,
and passed, and never sight he saw
of shining shore nor light he sought.

He saw the Mountain silent rise
where twilight lies upon the knees
of Valinor, and Eldamar
beheld afar beyond the seas.

A wanderer escaped from night
to haven white he came at last,
to Elvenhome the green and fair
where keen the air, where pale as glass
beneath the Hill of Ilmarin
a-glimmer in a valley sheer
the lamplit towers of Tirion
are mirrored on the Shadowmere.

He came unto the timeless halls
where shining fall the countless years,
and endless reigns the Elder King
in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer;
and words unheard were spoken then
of folk of Men and Elven-kin,
beyond the world were visions showed
forbid to those that dwell therein.

From Evereven's lofty hills
where softly silver fountains fall
his wings him bore, a wandering light,
beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.

He walked along the terraces above
the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains, and shine
down slanting through the thin silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the
woven nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush.

The noise of bubbling waters
came up from the foaming river-bed.

Much was said of
events in the world outside, especially in the South, and in the wide lands east of the Mountains.

It appeared that amid the splendour of their works of
hand the hearts of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were troubled.

For in that time he was not yet evil to behold, and they received his
aid and grew mighty in craft, whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged
secretly in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master.

From the ruin of the Gladden Fields, where Isildur perished, three men
only came ever back over the mountains after long wandering.

For the folk of Arnor dwindled, and their foes
devoured them, and their lordship passed, leaving only green mounds in the grassy hills.

Their chief city was Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars, through the midst of which the River
flowed.

And Minas Ithil they built, Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward upon a shoulder of the
Mountains of Shadow; and westward at the feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made,
Tower of the Setting Sun.

But the Lords of Minas Tirith still fight on, defying our
enemies, keeping the passage of the River from Argonath to the Sea.

But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?
'Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away.

When the Enemy returned our folk were driven from Ithilien, our fair domain
east of the River, though we kept a foothold there and strength of arms.

I have crossed many mountains and many rivers, and trodden many plains, even into the far
countries of Rhun and Harad where the stars are strange.

But when dark things come from the houseless hills, or creep
from sunless woods, they fly from us.

"Strider" I am to one fat man who lives within a day's march of foes that would
freeze his heart or lay his little town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly.

What then is this one that he desires so much?
'There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the Mountain, between the loss
and the finding.

Into Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled
down the River to the Sea.

"'
Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of the Misty Mountains, at
whose great roots the peril of the world had so long lain hidden.

Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland, down even to the
Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor.

'There we had rumour of him, and we guess that
he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but we never found him, and at last I despaired.

But I learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of the Great

River nigh to the Gladden Fields.

We drove them off after some time; they were many and fierce, but they came from over
the mountains, and were unused to the woods.

We came on his trail among those of many Orcs, and it
plunged deep into the Forest, going south.

There messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I
heard of the Black Shadow a chill smote my heart.

They have crossed
the River secretly and are moving westward.

But Saruman has long studied the arts
of the Enemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestall him.

That is far south in
Isengard, in the end of the Misty Mountains, not far from the Gap of Rohan.

And Boromir will tell
you that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the northmost foothills
of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home.

"They have crossed the River.

And the Eagles
of the Mountains went far and wide, and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the
mustering of Orcs; and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands; and they heard news of
the escape of Gollum.

And I was glad, for in the Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords,
dwell, and there are no horses like those that are bred in that great vale between the Misty
Mountains and the White.
'"Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? "

But amidst his talk
I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton less than a week before, and that a black horseman
had come to the Hill the same evening.

Their Captain remained in
secret away south of Bree, while two rode ahead through the village, and four more invaded the
Shire.

But they closed round at night, and I
was besieged on the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Sul.

'The Barrow-wights we know by many names; and of the Old Forest many tales have been
told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern march.

But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed this is still
the same that walked the woods and hills long ago, and even then was older than the old.

And yet we see that Sauron
can torture and destroy the very hills.

A wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to
the east.

Some
had gone north beyond the springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors; and others had gone west,
and with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the Greyflood, as far
as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by a ruined town.

Many had gone east and
south; and some of these had crossed the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had
climbed the pass at the source of the Gladden River, and had come down into Wilderland and over
the Gladden Fields and so at length had reached the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel.

Even from the Eagles of the Misty Mountains they had learned no fresh
news.

Nothing had been seen or heard of Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were
hunting again far up the Great River.

The Shadow has crept now to the feet
of the Mountains, and draws nigh even to the borders of Greyflood; and under the Shadow all is
dark to me.

They are willing to go
at least to the passes of the Mountains, and maybe beyond.

The East Wind was streaming through the
bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark pines on the hills.

Boromir had a long sword, in fashion like Anduril but of less lineage and he bore
also a shield and his war-horn.

'Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,' he said, 'and then let all the foes of
Gondor flee!'

Gandalf bore his staff,
but girt at his side was the elven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon the breast
of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain.

Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring moodily into the gloom where
the river roared stonily below; his desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb.

Their purpose was to hold this course west of the Mountains for many
miles and days.

The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green vale of the Great
River in Wilderland on the other side of the range, and their going would be slow; but they hoped in
this way to escape the notice of unfriendly eyes.

For many
sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed able to keep
out its searching fingers.

Yet steadily the mountains were drawing nearer.

South of
Rivendell they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the feet of the main range there was
tumbled an ever wider land of bleak hills, and deep valleys filled with turbulent waters.

The
travellers reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to
have been built out of the very stone of the hills.

Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains that seemed now to
stand across the path that the Company was taking.

'But the mountains are ahead of us,' said Pippin.

'There is the land where our fathers worked of old, and we
have wrought the image of those mountains into many works of metal and of stone, and into many
songs and tales.

'There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their arms lies the deep-shadowed valley
which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call Nanduhirion.'
'It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,' said Gandalf.

There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in its icy
springs.'
'Dark is the water of Kheled-zaram,' said Gimli, 'and cold are the springs of Kibil-nala.

We must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to
the Great River, and then –'
He paused.
'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry.

'Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land between the Mountains and the
Greyflood,' he said, 'and they have passed over Hollin.

'But I'm beginning to think it's time
we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain and saw the end of the Road, so to speak.

It looked to Frodo like the remains of an ancient
road, that had once been broad and well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass.

The Moon, now

at the full, rose over the mountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were black.

It was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon was low.

But
the air was chill again; already the wind was turning back towards the east.

For two more nights
they marched on, climbing steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and
the mountains towered up, nearer and nearer.

But we must go on; and it is no
good our delaying the passage of the mountains.

'I was born under the shadow of the
White Mountains and know something of journeys in the high places.

By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains.

I knew the risk of snow,
though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save high up in the mountains.

"They say in my land that he
can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor.

Stones began to fall from the mountain-side, whistling over their heads, or
crashing on the path beside them.

'If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save us,' answered Gandalf.

She is walking in the blue
fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all.

It was flung across the mountain-path like a sheer and
sudden wall, and its crest, sharp as if shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the height of
Boromir; but through the middle a passage had been beaten, rising and falling like a bridge.

And indeed with that
last stroke the malice of the mountain seemed to be expended, as if Caradhras was satisfied that the
invaders had been beaten off and would not dare to return.

Far away in the tumble of country that lay at the foot of the mountain was the dell
from which they had started to climb the pass.

He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head was dizzy as he
thought of the long and painful march downhill.

In the distance below him, but still high above the lower
foothills, dark dots were circling in the air.

The mountains were veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was cold.

Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least been
tried.'

If we cannot cross
the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are
friendly to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither.

'Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has become more desperate, I fear.

Therefore I
advise that we should go neither over the mountains, nor round them, but under them.

But most of the Orcs of the Misty Mountains were scattered or
destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies.

The Wargs have come west of the Mountains!'
'Need we wait until morning then?' said Gandalf. '

For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of the small hill under which
they had been sheltering.

In the dead of the night many shining eyes were seen
peering over the brow of the hill.

Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs had
fled.

In the wavering firelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up, a great menacing
shape like the monument of some ancient king of stone set upon a hill.

The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light.

Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks; a bitter smoke curled
above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from the hill, as the first light of dawn came dimly
in the sky.

No trace of the fight remained but the charred trees and
the arrows of Legolas lying on the hill-top.

As they stood upon the hill-side, ready to
depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over the mountain-tops.

'There it lies,' he said, pointing away south-eastwards to where the mountains' sides fell sheer
into the shadows at their feet.

Together
they led the Company back towards the mountains.

Before them the mountains frowned, but their path lay in a
deep trough of land and they could see only the higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks.

The road under
the mountains is a dark road, and there are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if
we can.'
'Poor old Bill!' said Frodo.

It was green and stagnant, thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills.

'The passage is blocked behind us now and there is only one way out – on the other side of the
mountains.

Something
has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under the mountains.

The
Mines of Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, Gloin's son, dwarf of the
mountain-race though he was.

Already they seemed to
have been tramping on, on, endlessly to the mountains' roots.

A chill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible depths.

Then far below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in some
cavernous place, there came a plunk , very distant, but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft.

'That is all that I shall venture on for the present,' said Gandalf. 'There used to be great
windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines.

The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled close together in a corner
to escape the draught: there seemed to be a steady inflow of chill air through the eastern archway.

The world was young, the mountains green,
No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.

He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;

The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:

Unwearied then were Durin's folk
Beneath the mountains music woke:

The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge's fire is ashen-cold

No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:

In that dusty chamber
in the mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world.

Doom, doom it rolled again, as if huge hands were turning the very
caverns of Moria into a vast drum.

A great
cave-troll, I think, or more than one.

Before them was another cavernous hall.

Loud the challenge rang and bellowed,
like the shout of many throats under the cavernous roof.

The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light on the land.

Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under the mountain-shadow.

He looked towards the mountains and
held up his sword.

Northward the dale ran up into a glen of shadows between
two great arms of the mountains, above which three white peaks were shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol,
Caradhras, the Mountains of Moria.

At the head of the glen a torrent flowed like a white lace over
an endless ladder of short falls, and a mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains' feet.

To the east the outflung arm of the mountains marched to a sudden end, and far lands could be
descried beyond them, wide and vague.

To the south the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far
as sight could reach.

Then slowly they saw the
forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profound blue, and the peaks were like plumes of
white flame above them; beyond there was a space of sky.

'Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other mountain-streams,' said
Aragorn.

For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf
chose, and first I hope to come to the woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River-out
yonder.'

In spite of the shining sun the wind
seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria.

They had not gone far before the sun
sank behind the westward heights and great shadows crept down the mountain-sides.

The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them.

Believe what you will, there is no other way for us – unless you would go
back to Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or swim the Great River all alone.'
'Then lead on!' said Boromir.

They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they came upon another stream
flowing down swiftly from the tree-clad slopes that climbed back westward towards the mountains.

When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little food; and Legolas told
them tales of Lothlorien that the Elves of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sunlight and
starlight upon the meadows by the Great River before the world was grey.

In sunlight or in shade;
For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.

The elven-ship in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee
Awaited her for many a day

Beside the roaring sea.

When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.

It is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came upon
Lothlorien, Lorien of the Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.'

'Then many of the Elves of Nimrodel's
kindred left their dwellings and departed and she was lost far in the South, in the passes of the
White Mountains; and she came not to the ship where Amroth her lover waited for her.

Deep in their forest the trees are very great.

The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into the shadow of the deeper woods,
westward along the mountain-stream away from Silverlode.

Frodo could understand little of what was said, for the speech that the Silvan folk east
of the mountains used among themselves was unlike that of the West.

'We seldom
use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart of the forest, and do not willingly have
dealings with any other folk.

'But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dain's trusty people, and friendly to Elrond,' said
Frodo.

We have been
keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a great troop of Orcs going north toward Moria,
along the skirts of the mountains, many days ago.

'It is cold in the tree-tops in winter, though the
wind tonight is in the South; but we have food and drink to give you that will drive away the
night-chill, and we have skins and cloaks to spare.'

They crossed the Nimrodel – curse their foul feet in its clean water! – and went on
down the old road beside the river.

But soon Haldir
turned aside into the trees and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.

He made his end of the
rope fast about another tree, and then ran lightly along it, over the river and back again, as if he
were on a road.

Sam shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water
as if it was a chasm in the mountains.

You cannot cross the rivers again, and behind you there are now secret sentinels that you cannot
pass.

'The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the Shadow has crept
northward all about us.

The
mountains to the west are growing evil; to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron's
creatures; and it is rumoured that we cannot now safely pass southward through Rohan, and the
mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy.

He could
hear many different notes in the rustle of the leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on his
right, and the thin clear voices of birds in the sky.

The marauding orcs had been waylaid and almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled
westward towards the mountains, and were being pursued.

At the feet of the trees, and all about the
green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden flowers shaped like stars.

Over all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the
hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.

'Behold!

He felt a delight in wood and
the touch of it, neither as forester nor as carpenter; it was the delight of the living tree itself.

Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many mighty trees, or a city of green
towers: which it was he could not tell.

Then he
looked eastward and saw all the land of Lorien running down to the pale gleam of Anduin, the
Great River.

He lifted his eyes across the river and all the light went out, and he was back again in
the world he knew.

Beyond the river the land appeared flat and empty, formless and vague, until far
away it rose again like a wall, dark and drear.

'It is clad in a forest of dark fir,
where the trees strive one against another and their branches rot and wither.

At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as a tree; but in his hand was a
small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in his eyes.

And taking
Frodo's hand in his, he left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man.

Chapter 7
The Mirror of Galadriel
The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows were deepening in the woods,
when they went on again.

Upon the further
side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a green hill thronged with mallorn-trees
taller than any they had yet seen in all the land.

Along this
they went westward, with the city ever climbing up like a green cloud upon their left; and as the
night deepened more lights sprang forth, until all the hill seemed afire with stars.

Far away up on the hill

He has dwelt in the West
since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond
or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together through ages of the world we have fought the
long defeat.

When evening in the Shire was grey
his footsteps on the Hill were heard;
before the dawn he went away
on journey long without a word.

From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.

Turning aside, she led them toward the southern slopes of the hill of Caras Galadhon, and
passing through a high green hedge they came into an enclosed garden.

Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into a deep green hollow, through which ran
murmuring the silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill.

They've dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the poor old gaffer going
down the Hill with his bits of things on a barrow.

Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale
sky.

Then a wide river flowing through a
populous city.

We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget
and to be forgotten.'

And I shall not be dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night!
Fair as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain!

Indeed I do not think that even he had any clear purpose.'
'Maybe not,' said Celeborn, 'yet when you leave this land, you can no longer forget the Great
River.

The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this side, upon the west;
but the straight road of the Quest lies east of the River, upon the darker shore.

There are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk
know the swift Forest River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.'
'And one Hobbit!'

You will come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls of Rauros where the
River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there are other perils.

Yet they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave them and
the River, and turn west – or east.'

They would have been willing to follow a leader over the River and into the shadow of
Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind.

The Dimrill Dale is full of vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are troubled.

At last Haldir led
them down the southward slopes of the hill, and they came again to the great gate hung with lamps,
and to the white bridge; and so they passed out and left the city of the Elves.

Then they turned away
from the paved road and took a path that went off into a deep thicket of mallorn-trees, and passed
on, winding through rolling woodlands of silver shadow, leading them ever down, southwards and
eastwards, towards the shores of the River.

The lawn ran out into a narrow
tongue between bright margins: on the right and west the Silverlode flowed glittering; on the left
and east the Great River rolled its broad waters, deep and dark.

As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue, the trees drew
down to the river's brink.

They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing proudly down the stream toward
them, they saw a swan of great size.

A music came down the river as it drew nearer; and suddenly
they perceived that it was a ship, wrought and carved with elven-skill in the likeness of a bird.

The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away.

There the River flows in stony vale amid high moors, until at last after many
leagues it comes to the tall island of the Tindrock, that we call Tol Brandir.

There the Entwash flows in by
many mouths from the Forest of Fangorn in the west.

About that stream, on this side of the Great
River, lies Rohan.

On the further side are the bleak hills of the Emyn Muil.

'Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do well to leave the Great River
above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds the marshes.

Yet they should not go too far up
that stream, nor risk becoming entangled in the Forest of Fangorn.

When I was
sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap by the skirts of the White Mountains, and crossed
the Isen and the Greyflood into Northerland.

And if
ever I return to the smithies of my home, it shall be set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of
my house, and a pledge of good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.'

Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currents of the Great River, and their
boats turned and began to speed southwards.

She shone like a window of glass upon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake
seen from a mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of the land.

Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks rose upon either side, and the light of
Lorien was hidden.

She is too low in the water with all this
baggage, and the Great River is swift.

The breeze died away and the River flowed without a sound.

Frodo sat and listened to the faint lap and gurgle
of the River fretting among the tree-roots and driftwood near the shore, until his head nodded and
he fell into an uneasy sleep.

Chapter 9

The Great River
Frodo was roused by Sam.

He found that he was lying, well wrapped, under tall grey-skinned
trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west bank of the Great River, Anduin.

Not that most of the Company were eager to
hurry southwards: they were content that the decision, which they must make at latest when they
came to Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River bear them on
at its own pace, having no desire to hasten towards the perils that lay beyond, whichever course
they took in the end.

They had come to the Brown Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between
Southern Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil.

On this side of the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall
that they shut out all view to the west, as the little boats went rustling by along their fluttering
borders.

Here and there through openings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, and far
beyond them hills in the sunset, and away on the edge of sight a dark line, where marched the
southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains.

Ere long we shall come to the
mouth of the Limlight that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River.

That is the north
boundary of Rohan; and of old all that lay between Limlight and the White Mountains belonged to
the Rohirrim.

It is a rich and pleasant land, and its grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk do
not dwell by the River or ride often to its shores.

He felt that
the Company was too naked, afloat in little open boats in the midst of shelterless lands, and on a
river that was the frontier of war.

Soon the River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the
east, and there were gravel-shoals in the water, so that careful steering was needed.

The Brown
Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air from the East.

'There are many in the River.

I
thought I heard some soft plashing and a sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such
queer sounds by a river at night.'

I hoped the river-voyage would beat him, but he is too clever a
waterman.

Soon they were passing through a hilly rocky land, and on both shores there were steep
slopes buried in deep brakes of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers.

They were drawing near to the grey

hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southern march of Wilderland.

It is far from
the mountains.'
'We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn.

We are coming to reaches
of the River that I do not know well: for I have never journeyed by water in these parts before, not
between here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir.

The night grew dark, but the stars above were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer on
the face of the River.

As they were swept aside the travellers
could see, now very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were thrust
out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth.

The River
seems set on taking us right into their arms!'

Stringing the bow and fitting an arrow he
turned, peering back over the River into the darkness.

Frodo felt a sudden chill running through him and clutching at his heart; there was a deadly
cold, like the memory of an old wound, in his shoulder.

'It was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that had come upon him.

The rushing of the River
over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow louder and closer.

There was mist on the River, and white fog
swathed the shore; the far bank could not be seen.

'I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River any further,' said Boromir.

The
River is at least a path that cannot be missed.'

I fear we must leave the River now, and make for the
portage-way as best we can from here.'
'That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,' said Boromir.

It sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of grey
limestone-boulders, with many hidden holes shrouded with weeds and bushes; there were thickets
of brambles, and sheer dells; and

Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling rock-wall, and to their left mist shrouded the
River: they could hear it rushing and foaming over the sharp shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir,
but they could not see it.

It seemed to have been scooped in the river-side, not by hand, but by the water swirling
down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier of rock that jutted out some way into the stream.

They kept as close as they could to
the western side, and they could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy
walls with their feet in the hurrying river.

Slowly the sky above grew lighter, and then suddenly the
clouds broke, and their draggled fringes trailed away northward up the River.

The channel grew narrower and the River
swifter.

Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky, around them the dark overshadowed River, and
before them black, shutting out the sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no opening could be seen.

A narrow gap appeared between them, and the River swept the boats towards it.

Just let me get out
of this boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river!'
'Fear not!' said a strange voice behind him.

The pent waters
spread out into a long oval lake, pale Nen Hithoel, fenced by steep grey hills whose sides were clad
with trees, but their heads were bare, cold-gleaming in the sunlight.

The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered from them, an
island in the waters, about which the flowing River flung pale shimmering arms.

'Upon the left stands
Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen the Hills of Hearing and of Sight.

The sides of the westward hills fell into shadow, and the Sun grew round and red.

Already night was laid on the flowing waters when the travellers
came at last under the shadow of the hills.

Chapter 10
The Breaking of the Fellowship
Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River.

Behind it rose the
first gentle slopes of the hill clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving
shores of the lake.

'But maybe they are not on this side of the River.

Wandering aimlessly at first in the wood, Frodo found that his feet were leading him up
towards the slopes of the hill.

Frodo halted and looked out over the
River, far below him, to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between him and
the untrodden isle.

He was already far away, leaping
blindly up the path to the hill-top.

Up he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like a lost child that had clambered
upon the throne of mountain-kings.

He was sitting upon
the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Numenor.

Eastward he looked
into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, and forests unexplored.

Northward he looked, and the
Great River lay like a ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountains stood small and hard as broken
teeth.

Southward he looked, and below his very feet the Great River curled
like a toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow
played upon the fume.

And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of
sea-birds whirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green and silver sea, rippling in
endless lines.

The Misty Mountains were crawling like
anthills: orcs were issuing out of a thousand holes.

Far away it
seemed, and beautiful: white-walled, many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountain-seat; its
battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were bright with many banners.

It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of Minas
Morgul, and the haunted Mountains, and it looked upon Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the Land
of Mordor.

Then at last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlement upon
battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw
it: Barad-dur, Fortress of Sauron.

He vanished and passed down the hill,
less than a rustle of the wind.

The others remained long by the river-side.

Of course he's had a bit of
schooling, so to speak – we all have – since we left home, or he'd be so terrified he'd just fling the
Ring in the River and bolt.

Yes: I found him some
way up the hill, and I spoke to him.

Just as he reached the little lawn
among the rowans he overtook him, toiling uphill, panting and calling: Frodo!
'Come with me, Sam!'

He can't fly across rivers, and he can't jump waterfalls.

Gurgling he went under, and the River closed over his curly head.

Frodo paddled away from
the shore, and the River bore them swiftly away, down the western arm, and past the frowning cliffs
of Tol Brandir.

Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would bring
them over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and down into the Land of Shadow.

