It was begun soon after
The Hobbit was written and before its publication in 1937; but I did not go on with this sequel, for
I wished first to complete and set in order the mythology and legends of the Elder Days, which had
then been taking shape for some years.

When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope to no hope , I went back
to the sequel, encouraged by requests from readers for more information concerning hobbits and
their adventures.

The
process had begun in the writing of The Hobbit , in which there were already some references to the
older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the High-elves, and the orcs, as well as glimpses that had arisen
unbidden of things higher or deeper or darker than its surface: Durin, Moria, Gandalf, the
Necromancer, the Ring.

Those who had asked for more information about hobbits eventually got it, but they had to
wait a long time; for the composition of The Lord of the Rings went on at intervals during the
years 1936 to 1949, a period in which I had many duties that I did not neglect, and many other
interests as a learner and teacher that often absorbed me.

It is perhaps not possible in a long tale to please
everybody at all points, nor to displease everybody at the same points; for I find from the letters that
I have received that the passages or chapters that are to some a blemish are all by others specially
approved.

The most critical reader of all, myself, now finds many defects, minor and major, but
being fortunately under no obligation either to review the book or to write it again, he will pass over
these in silence, except one that has been noted by others: the book is too short.

It is neither
allegorical nor topical.

Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, would in the
confusion and treacheries of the time have found in Mordor the missing links in his own researches
into Ring-lore, and before long he would have made a Great Ring of his own with which to
challenge the self-styled Ruler of Middle-earth.

Other arrangements could be devised according to the tastes or views of those who like
allegory or topical reference.

But I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and always
have done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence.

I think that many
confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader, and the other
in the purposed domination of the author.

One has indeed personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression;
but as the years go by it seems now often forgotten that to be caught in youth by 1914 was no less
hideous an experience than to be involved in 1939 and the following years.

It is an essential part of the plot, foreseen from the outset, though in the event
modified by the character of Saruman as developed in the story without, need I say, any allegorical
significance or contemporary political reference whatsoever.

Recently I saw in a paper a picture of the last decrepitude of the once thriving corn-mill beside its
pool that long ago seemed to me so important.

Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more numerous formerly than they are
today; for they love peace and quiet and good tilled earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed
countryside was their favourite haunt.

Even in ancient days they were, as a rule, shy of 'the Big Folk', as they call us, and now they avoid
us with dismay and are becoming hard to find.

Their faces were as a rule good-natured
rather than beautiful, broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to laughter, and to eating
and drinking.

The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in the Elder Days that are
now lost and forgotten.

Most of their earlier settlements
had long disappeared and been forgotten in Bilbo's time; but one of the first to become important
still endured, though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood that lay round about,
some forty miles east of the Shire.

And in those days also they forgot whatever languages they had used before, and spoke ever after
the Common Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was current through all the lands of the
kings from Arnor to Gondor, and about all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to Lune.

While there was still a king they were in
name his subjects, but they were, in fact, ruled by their own chieftains and meddled not at all with
1 As the records of Gondor relate this was Argeleb II, the twentieth of the Northern line, which came to an end with
Arvedui three hundred years later.

But in
that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the Hobbits took the land for their own, and they
chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the authority of the king that was gone.

They forgot or ignored what little they had ever
known of the Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possible the long peace of the Shire.

They were, if it came to
it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they were, perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of good things not least
because they could, when put to it, do without them, and could survive rough handling by grief, foe,
or weather in a way that astonished those who did not know them well and looked no further than
their bellies and their well-fed faces.

They did not go in for towers.

The genealogical trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small book
in themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them exceedingly dull.

It grows
abundantly in Gondor, and there is richer and larger than in the North, where it is never found wild,
and flourishes only in warm sheltered places like Longbottom.

The Men of Gondor call it sweet
galenas , and esteem it only for the fragrance of its flowers.

But even the Dunedain of Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits first put it into pipes.

Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long
ago, and became as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.'

3.

The Shire at this time had hardly any 'government'.

There were many reports and complaints of strange persons and creatures prowling about
the borders, or over them: the first sign that all was not quite as it should be, and always had been
except in tales and legends of long ago.

Of the Finding of the Ring
As is told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo's door the great Wizard, Gandalf the
Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed, than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of
kings, and his twelve companions in exile.

With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment,
on a morning of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great treasure, the
dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in the East.

The
quest was successful, and the Dragon that guarded the hoard was destroyed.

Trying to find his way out.

Bilbo went on down to the roots of the mountains, until he could
go no further.

At the bottom of the tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock
in the water lived Gollum.

He possessed a secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light: a
ring of gold that made its wearer invisible.

So to gain
time Gollum challenged Bilbo to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo
could not guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then he would do as
Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.

Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor back.

In the end Bilbo won the game, more by
luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for he was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his
hand came upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten: What have I got in my pocket?

This
Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses.

The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question was a mere 'question' and not a
'riddle' according to the strict rules of the Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to
guess the answer, Gollum was bound by his promise.

But after ages alone in the
dark Gollum‟s heart was black, and treachery was in it.

But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone.

But Gollum had at last leaped to
a guess, too late.

What has it got in its pocketses?

Just in time Bilbo saw his
peril, and he fled blindly up the passage away from the water; and once more he was saved by his
luck.

So
it was that Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to guard the way out, lest the „thief‟
should escape.

Warily Bilbo followed him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about
his 'precious'; from which talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him in the
darkness: he himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of escape from the orcs and from
Gollum.

There Gollum crouched at bay, smelling and
listening; and Bilbo was tempted to slay him with his sword.

But pity stayed him, and though he
kept the ring, in which his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill the wretched creature
at a disadvantage.

In the end, gathering his courage, he leaped over Gollum in the dark, and fled
away down the passage, pursued by his enemy's cries of hate and despair: Thief, thief!

To
them his account was that Gollum had promised to give him a present , if he won the game; but
when Gollum went to fetch it from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which
had been given to him long ago on his birthday.

But being in a tight place, he
said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him the way out, as a reward instead of a present.

Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning,
which for a while strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth important.

Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, and disturbing, to find that the good
hobbit had not told the truth from the first: quite contrary to his habit.

It was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum's talk

that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his 'birthday present', many times.

With the help of the ring he escaped
from the orc-guards at the gate and rejoined his companions.

He used the ring many times on his
quest, chiefly for the help of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as long as he could.

After
his return to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf and Frodo; and no one
else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he believed.

His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his coat of marvellous mail, the gift of
the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he lent to a museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in
fact.

It was kept at Great Smials, but it was written in Condor,
probably at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172).

Its southern scribe appended this note: Findegil, King's Writer, finished this work in IV 172.

That book was a copy, made at the
request of King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was brought to him by the Thain
Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64.

In Minas Tirith it received much annotation, and many corrections, especially
of names, words, and quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated
version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside the account of the War.

But the chief importance of Findegil's copy is that it alone contains the
whole of Bilbo's 'Translations from the Elvish'.

Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their great families, and at the same time
kept up their connexions with Rohan and Gondor, the libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough
contained much that did not appear in the Red Book.

Some of these were composed or begun by Meriadoc
himself, though in the Shire he was chiefly remembered for his Herblore of the Shire , and for his
Reckoning of Years m which he discussed the relation of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to
those of Rivendell, Gondor, and Rohan.

None of them was written by Peregrin, but he and his successors collected many
manuscripts written by scribes of Gondor: mainly copies or summaries of histories or legends
relating to Elendil and his heirs.

And if that was not
enough for fame, there was also his prolonged vigour to marvel at.

There were
some that shook their heads and thought this was too much of a good thing; it seemed unfair that
anyone should possess (apparently) perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.

„It isn‟t natural, and trouble will come of it!‟
But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with his money, most
people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good fortune.

Bilbo was going to be eleventy-one , 111, a rather curious number and a
very respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130); and Frodo was
going to be thirty-three , 33) an important number: the date of his „coming of age‟.
Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming event travelled all
over the Shire.

He held forth at The Ivy Bush , a small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority,
for he had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job
before that.

It beats me why any Baggins of
Hobbiton should go looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.‟
„And no wonder they‟re queer,‟ put in Daddy Twofoot (the Gaffer‟s next-door neighbour), „if
they live on the wrong side of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest.

A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never
much to tell of him, till he was drownded.‟
„Drownded?‟ said several voices.

„You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck.

She
was our Mr. Bilbo‟s first cousin on the mother‟s side (her mother being the youngest of the Old
Took‟s daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin.

And Mr. Drogo was staying at
Brandy Hall with his father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him
being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table); and he went out
boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a
child and all.

„
„I‟ve heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,‟ said Old Noakes; „and it
was Drogo‟s weight as sunk the boat.‟

„There isn‟t no call to go talking of pushing and pulling.

Old Master Gorbadoc never had
fewer than a couple of hundred relations in the place.

They thought they were
going to get Bag End, that time when he went off and was thought to be dead.

And then he comes
back and orders them off; and he goes on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless
him!

„All the top of your hill is full of tunnels packed
with chests of gold and silver, and jools, by what I‟ve heard.

I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad.

I‟d not long come prentice to old Holman (him being my dad‟s cousin), but he had me up at Bag
End helping him to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale was
on.

I don‟t doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn‟t enough to fill tunnels.

‘Elves and Dragons’ I says to him.

Don’t
go getting mixed up in the business of your betters, or you’ll land in trouble too big for you,’ I says
to him.

There‟s some not far away that wouldn‟t
offer a pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden walls.

Our Sam says that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and there‟s going to be
presents, mark you, presents for all – this very month as is.‟
That very month was September, and as fine as you could ask.

A day or two later a rumour
(probably started by the knowledgeable Sam) was spread about that there were going to be
fireworks – fireworks, what is more, such as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century,
not indeed since the Old Took died.

An odd-looking waggon laden with odd-looking
packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End.

It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly guessed.

When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had finished unloading.

The flowers glowed red and
golden: snap-dragons and sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping
in at the round windows.

„You mean to go on with your plan then?‟
„I do.

I made up my mind months ago, and I haven‟t changed it.‟
„Very well.

It is no good saying any more.

There
was a constant stream of them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank
you, I shall certainly come .

One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south of Bilbo‟s front door, covered
with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions.

The tents began to go up.

The sun got up, the clouds vanished,
flags were unfurled and the fun began.

But they never got tired of them.

On this occasion the presents were unusually good.

The hobbit-children were so excited that
for a while they almost forgot about eating.

But there was
also a generous distribution of squibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles,
elf-fountains, goblin-barkers and thunder-claps.

Out flew a red-golden dragon – not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws,
his eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed three times over the heads of the crowd.

The dragon passed like an express train, turned a
somersault, and burst over Bywater with a deafening explosion.

Many young hobbits were included, and present by parental
permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the matter of sitting up late,
especially when there was a chance of getting them a free meal.

Bringing up young hobbits took a
lot of provender.

There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks and Brandybucks; there were
various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins‟ grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his
Took grandfather); and a selection of Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots.

The Sackville-Bagginses were not forgotten.

They disliked
Bilbo and detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in golden ink, that
they had felt it was impossible to refuse.

They were sipping
their favourite drinks, and nibbling at their favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten.

The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming face;
the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat.

My dear Bagginses and Boffins , he began again; and my dear Tooks and Brandybucks, and
Grubbs, and Chubbs, and Burrowses, and Hornblowers, and Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies,
Brockhouses and Proudfoots .

Also my good Sackville-Bagginses that I welcome back at last to
Bag End.

Indeed, in one corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks,
supposing Uncle Bilbo to have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got
up an impromptu orchestra, and began a merry dance-tune.

Master Everard Took and Miss Melilot
Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in their hands began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty
dance, but rather vigorous.

Many of his guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling sure
they had only been asked to fill up the required number, like goods in a package.

I am going.

GOOD-BYE!

Then there was a dead silence, until suddenly, after several deep breaths, every Baggins,
Boffin, Took, Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse, Goodbody,
Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to talk at once.

For some time he had sat silent beside
Bilbo‟s empty chair, and ignored all remarks and questions.

He gave orders for more wine to be
served; then he got up and drained his own glass silently to the health of Bilbo, and slipped out of
the pavilion.

As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, he had been fingering the golden
ring in his pocket: his magic ring that he had kept secret for so many years.

Into the envelope he slipped his golden ring, and its
fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo.

'I wondered if you would turn up.‟
'I am glad to find you visible,‟ replied the wizard, sitting down in a chair, 'I wanted to catch
you and have a few final words.

I suppose you feel that everything has gone off splendidly and
according to plan?‟

Are
you going any further?‟

I want to see mountains again, Gandalf, mountains ,
and then find somewhere where I can rest .

I might find somewhere where I can
finish my book.

Frodo has read some already, as far as it has gone.

„You are always badgering me about my ring;
but you have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.‟

I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again.

Even if Gollum said the same once.

It has got far too much hold on you.

Let it go!

And then you
can go yourself, and be free.‟
„I‟ll do as I choose and go as I please,‟ said Bilbo obstinately.

I found it, and Gollum would have killed me, if I
hadn‟t kept it.

I am not trying to
rob you, but to help you.

Go away and leave it behind.

„Very well,‟ said Bilbo, „it goes to Frodo with all the rest.‟ He drew a deep breath.

I have said good-bye, and I couldn‟t bear to
do it all over again.‟

„You have still got the ring in your pocket,‟ said the wizard.

Good-bye!

„Good-bye, Gandalf!‟
„Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo.

I am being swept off my feet at last,‟ he
added, and then in a low voice, as if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.

Now far ahead the Road has gone,

„Goodbye, my dear Bilbo –
until our next meeting!‟ he said softly and went back indoors.

„Has he
gone?‟ he asked.

„Yes,‟ answered Gandalf, „he has gone at last.‟
„I wish – I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,‟ said Frodo.

„But I knew in
my heart that he really meant to go.

„You‟ll find his will and all the other documents in there, I think,‟ said the wizard.

And also, I fancy, you‟ll find a golden ring.‟
„The ring!‟ exclaimed Frodo.

Now I am going to bed.‟
As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye to the guests.

People
came and began (by orders) to clear away the pavilions and the tables and the chairs, and the spoons
and knives and bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and the
crumbs and cracker-paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and handkerchiefs, and the uneaten food (a
very small item).

His reply to all inquiries was simply this:
„Mr. Bilbo Baggins has gone away; as far as I know, for good.‟ Some of the visitors he invited to
come inside, as Bilbo had left „messages‟ for them.

Dora was Drogo‟s sister and the eldest surviving female relative of Bilbo
and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had written reams of good advice for more than half a century.

For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B ., on a gold pen and ink-bottle.

For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a contributor , on an (empty) book-case.

Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than usual at returning them.

Bilbo
believed that she had acquired a good many of his spoons, while he was away on his former
journey.

Bilbo‟s residence had got rather
cluttered up with things in the course of his long life.

Not, of course, that the birthday-presents were always new , there were one or two old mathoms of
forgotten uses that had circulated all around the district; but Bilbo had usually given new presents,
and kept those that he received.

Old
Gaffer Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollen waistcoat, and a bottle of
ointment for creaking joints.

Old Rory Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality, got a dozen
bottles of Old Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as it had
been laid down by Bilbo‟s father.

Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke
out.

Just
go and tell him so!‟
Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover their parting gift of
spoons.

But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of.

A
little later Frodo came out of the study to see how things were going on and found her still about the
place, investigating nooks and corners and tapping the floors.

Why didn‟t you go too?

The legend of Bilbo‟s gold excited both curiosity and
hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if not positively ill-gotten), is, as every one knows,
any one‟s for the finding – unless the search is interrupted.

„Lock the door, and don‟t open it to anyone today, not
even if they bring a battering ram.‟

But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap towards Bywater with a
face that would have curdled new milk.‟
„She had already nearly curdled me.

"No secrets between us, Frodo," he said; "but they are not to go any further.

I am going off at once: so this is good-bye for the present.‟ He got up.

I was looking
forward to your help.‟
„I did mean to – but I have had to change my mind.

I may be away for a good while; but I‟ll
come and see you again, as soon as I can.

I find that I have become rather unpopular.

I would
give them Bag End and everything else, if I could get Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country
with him.

But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone too.

Good-bye now!

Good-bye!‟
Frodo saw him to the door.

It became a fireside-story for young hobbits; and
eventually Mad Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and reappear with bags of
jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long after all the true events
were forgotten.

But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood was that Bilbo, who had
always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and had run off into the Blue.

He refused to go into mourning; and the next year he gave a
party in honour of Bilbo‟s hundred-and-twelfth birthday, which he called Hundred-weight Feast.

Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving Bilbo‟s Birthday
Party year after year until they got used to it.

He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends, especially among the
younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old Took) who had as children been fond of Bilbo and
often in and out of Bag End.

As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of good „preservation‟:
outwardly he retained the appearance of a robust and energetic hobbit just out of his tweens.

But half unknown to himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily
growing.

The conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of
Frodo‟s fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the Shire rumours had been
heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them.

Take dragons now.‟
„No thank ‟ee,‟ said Ted, „I won‟t.

There‟s only one Dragon in Bywater, and that‟s Green,‟ he said, getting
a general laugh.

He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up to the Northfarthing
for the hunting.

They do say they are going to the harbours,
out away beyond the White Towers.‟

„They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into the West and leaving us,‟

said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking his head sadly and solemnly.

Your good health!‟

He had a good deal to think about.

After a while he
sighed, and got up and went out.

Then he paid Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he
went off again.

During the next year or two he had turned up fairly often, coming unexpectedly
after dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise.

His hair was perhaps whiter than it had been then, and his beard and
eyebrows were perhaps longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with the same vigour and delight.

„In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as you call them, and they
were, of course, of various kinds: some more potent and some less.

Yes, sooner or later –
later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but neither strength nor good purpose will last –
sooner or later the dark power will devour him.‟
„How terrifying!‟ said Frodo.

„When did I first begin to guess?‟ he mused, searching back in memory.

I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring, as plainly it was – that at least
was clear from the first.

When I at last got the truth out of him, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his
claim to the ring beyond doubt.

Much like Gollum with his “birthday present”.

I told Bilbo often that
such rings were better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry.

And I have spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.‟
„There wasn‟t any permanent harm done, was there?‟ asked Frodo anxiously.

Among the Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of
knowledge, but full of surprises.

No, I was not troubled about dear Bilbo any more,
once he had let the thing go.

„Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you, and about all these charming,
absurd, helpless hobbits.

It looked to be made of pure and solid gold.

After a while Gandalf got up, closed the shutters
outside the window, and drew the curtains.

But this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close
enough:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.

One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.‟
He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: „This is the Master-ring, the One Ring to
rule them all.

This is the One Ring that he lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power.

three he has recovered, and the others the
dragons have consumed.

Long
ago they fell under the dominion of the One, and they became Ringwraiths, shadows under his great
Shadow, his most terrible servants.

Long ago.

„The strength of the Elves to resist him was greater
long ago; and not all Men were estranged from them.

That is a chapter of ancient history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too,
and gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain.

„Long after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the Great River on the edge of
Wilderland a clever-handed and quiet-footed little people.

The most inquisitive and curious-minded of that family was called Smeagol.

„He had a friend called Deagol, of similar sort, sharper-eyed but not so quick and strong.

There Smeagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Deagol sat in the boat
and fished.

Then he let go of his line, for he thought he saw
something shining in the river-bed; and holding his breath he grabbed at it.

when he washed the mud away, there in his hand lay a beautiful golden ring;
and it shone and glittered in the sun, so that his heart was glad.

But Smeagol had been watching him
from behind a tree, and as Deagol gloated over the ring, Smeagol came softly up behind.

„“Give us that, Deagol, my love,” said Smeagol, over his friend‟s shoulder.

„“Why?” said Deagol.

„“Because it‟s my birthday, my love, and I wants it,” said Smeagol.

„“I don‟t care,” said Deagol.

I
found this, and I‟m going to keep it.”

„“Oh, are you indeed, my love,” said Smeagol; and he caught Deagol by the throat and
strangled him, because the gold looked so bright and beautiful.

„No one ever found out what had become of Deagol; he was murdered far from home, and his
body was cunningly hidden.

But Smeagol returned alone; and he found that none of his family
could see him, when he was wearing the ring.

He was very pleased with his discovery and he
concealed it; and he used it to find out secrets, and he put his knowledge to crooked and malicious
uses.

He took to thieving, and
going about muttering to himself, and gurgling in his throat.

So they called him Gollum , and cursed
him, and told him to go far away; and his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him from the
family and turned him out of her hole.

He wondered at it, for he had almost forgotten about the Sun.

„So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a little cave out of which the
dark stream ran; and he wormed his way like a maggot into the heart of the hills, and vanished out
of all knowledge.

The Ring went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power
had begun to grow again, could learn nothing of it.‟
„Gollum!‟ cried Frodo.

„Gollum?

Do you mean that this is the very Gollum-creature that
Bilbo met?

How loathsome!‟
„I think it is a sad story,‟ said the wizard, „and it might have happened to others, even to some
hobbits that I have known.‟
„I can‟t believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, however distantly,‟ said Frodo with
some heat.

Gollum meant to cheat all the time.

Even Gollum was not wholly ruined.

It was actually
pleasant, I think, to hear a kindly voice again, bringing up memories of wind, and trees, and sun on
the grass, and such forgotten things.

„All the “great secrets” under the mountains had turned out to be just empty night: there was
nothing more to find out, nothing worth doing, only nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.

But if he hated it, why didn‟t he get rid of it, or go away and leave it?‟
„You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,‟ said Gandalf.

But as far as I know Bilbo alone in history has ever
gone beyond playing, and really done it.

He needed all my help, too.

It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided

things.

It had slipped from Isildur‟s hand and betrayed him; then when a chance came it caught
poor Deagol, and he was murdered; and after that Gollum, and it had devoured him.

So now, when its master was awake once more and sending out his dark
thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum.

I can
put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant to find the Ring, and not by its maker.

But how have you learned
all this about the Ring, and about Gollum?

„But I am not going to give an account of all my doings to you .

„But I expected to find it.

I
have come back from dark journeys and long search to make that final test.

Making out Gollum‟s part, and fitting it into the gap in the history,
required some thought.

I may have started with guesses about Gollum, but I am not guessing now.

I have seen him.‟
„You have seen Gollum?‟ exclaimed Frodo in amazement.

I tried long ago; but I have managed it
at last.‟
„Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him?

What I have told you is what Gollum was willing to tell – though not, of
course, in the way I have reported it.

Gollum is a liar, and you have to sift his words.

I have no doubt that
Smeagol's grandmother was a matriarch, a great person in her way, but to talk of her possessing
many Elven-rings was absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a lie.

„The murder of Deagol haunted Gollum, and he had made up a defence, repeating it to his
“precious” over and over again, as he gnawed bones in the dark, until he almost believed it.

Deagol ought to have given the ring to him.

He muttered that he
was going to get his own back.

Gollum had good friends now, good friends and very strong.

They would
help him.

„But how did he find that out?‟ asked Frodo.

„Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself; and after that it would not
be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum came out.

“What had it got in its pocketses?” he said.

Not a fair question.

Gollum‟s sharp
ears would soon learn what he wanted.‟

I think Gollum tried to.

It climbed trees to find nests; it crept into
holes to find the young; it slipped through windows to find cradles.

I let him go; for I had much
else to think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman.

„Well, that was years ago.

And my search would have been in
vain, but for the help that I had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this
age of the world.

Together we sought for Gollum down the whole length of Wilderland, without
hope, and without success.

But at last, when I had given up the chase and turned to other parts,
Gollum was found.

My friend returned out of the great perils bringing the miserable creature with
him.

He only wept and called us cruel, with many a
gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he whined and cringed, and rubbed his long hands,
licking his fingers as if they pained him, as if he remembered some old torture.

There were his fine new friends, who would help him in his revenge!

He knows where Gollum found his ring.

„But I am frightened; and I do not feel any pity for Gollum.‟
„You have not seen him,‟ Gandalf broke in.

I have not much hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, but there is
a chance of it.

My heart tells me that he has some part
to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and when that comes, the pity of Bilbo may rule the fate
of many – yours not least.

The
Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as they can find in their wise
hearts.‟
„All the same,‟ said Frodo, „even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I wish he had not kept the
Ring.

I wish he had never found it, and that I had not got it!

Indeed it certainly would; for this is the
One, and he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it to himself.

And you must remember that nine years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew
little for certain.‟

„But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done long ago?‟ cried Frodo again.

The gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo
thought how rich and beautiful was its colour, how perfect was its roundness.

Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily let it go, nor will to
damage it.

„Your small fire, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold.

It has been said that
dragon-fire could melt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not now any dragon left on
earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was there ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the
Black, who could have harmed the One Ring, the Ruling Ring, for that was made by Sauron
himself.

There is only one way: to find the Cracks of Doom in the depths of Orodruin, the
Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond the grasp
of the Enemy for ever.‟
„I do really wish to destroy it!‟ cried Frodo.

I am not made for
perilous quests.

Why was I chosen?‟
„Such questions cannot be answered,‟ said Gandalf.

Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity, pity for weakness and the desire of
strength to do good.

But I will always help you.‟

„I will help you bear this burden, as long as it is yours to bear.

Have you decided what to do?‟
„No!‟ answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness, and finding to his surprise
that it was not dark, and that out of the window he could see the sunlit garden.

„But I hope that you may find some other better keeper soon.

I ought to leave Bag End, leave the Shire, leave everything and go away.‟

„I should like to save the Shire, if I could – though there have been times when I thought the
inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons
might be good for them.

I feel that as long as the Shire lies behind,
safe and comfortable, I shall find wandering more bearable: I shall know that somewhere there is a
firm foothold, even if my feet cannot stand there again.

„Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that as a kind of holiday,
a series of adventures like Bilbo‟s or better, ending in peace.

And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and
save the Shire.

The Enemy is so
strong and terrible.‟
He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to follow Bilbo flamed up in his
heart – to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps to find him again.

It was so strong that it overcame his
fear: he could almost have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done
on a similar morning long ago.

The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much
longer; and for your own sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of
Baggins behind you.

When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.

„But I don‟t think you need go alone.

Not if you know of anyone you can trust, and who
would be willing to go by your side – and that you would be willing to take into unknown perils.

But just you up and
answer his questions straight away!‟

„I heard a deal that I didn‟t rightly understand, about an
enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir, and dragons, and a fiery mountain, and – and Elves, sir.

I
listened because I couldn‟t help myself, if you know what I mean.

Couldn‟t you take me to see Elves, sir, when you go?‟
Suddenly Gandalf laughed.

„So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?‟
„I did, sir.

I tried not to, sir, but it burst
out of me: I was so upset.‟
„It can‟t be helped, Sam,‟ said Frodo sadly.

„I shall have to go.

You shall go
away with Mr. Frodo!‟
„Me, sir!‟ cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.

„Me go and see Elves and all!

Chapter 3
Three is Company
„You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,‟ said Gandalf.

Two or three weeks had
passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to go.

In the mean-while, do take care, and don‟t let out any hint of
where you are going!

If he does, I really shall turn him into
a toad.‟
„As for where I am going,‟ said Frodo, „it would be difficult to give that away, for I have no
clear idea myself, yet.‟
„Don‟t be absurd!‟ said Gandalf.

And you must go, or at least set out, either North, South, West or East – and the direction should
certainly not be known.‟
„I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and of saying farewell, that I
have never even considered the direction,‟ said Frodo.

„For where am I to go?

What is to be my quest?

Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose
one, and not return, as far as I can see.‟
„But you cannot see very far,‟ said Gandalf.

It may be your task to find the
Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do not know.

„Very good: I will go east, and I will make for Rivendell.

One summer‟s evening an astonishing piece of news reached the Ivy Bush and Green
Dragon .

Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten for more important
matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed he had already sold it – to the Sackville-Bagginses!

A
few held the theory – supported by the nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself – that Frodo‟s money
was running out: he was going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the sale
down in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations.

Though
he kept himself very quiet and did not go about by day, it was well known that he was „hiding up in
the Bag End‟.

But however a removal might fit in with the designs of his wizardry, there was no
doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.

„Merry Brandybuck is looking out for a nice
little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.‟
As a matter of fact with Merry‟s help he had already chosen and bought a little house at
Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury.

To all but Sam he pretended he was going to settle
down there permanently.

The decision to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for
Buckland was on the eastern borders of the Shire, and as he had lived there in childhood his going
back would at least seem credible.

Then one evening, at the end of June, soon
after Frodo‟s plan had been finally arranged, he suddenly announced that he was going off again
next morning.

„But I am going down beyond the southern
borders to get some news, if I can.

I think after all you may need my company on the Road.‟
At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often what Gandalf could have heard;
but his uneasiness wore off, and in the fine weather he forgot his troubles for a while.

Some of Frodo‟s friends came to stay
and help him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin, and of course his
special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck.

On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland, conveying the furniture and
goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home, by way of the Brandywine Bridge.

Thursday, his birthday
morning, dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for Bilbo‟s great party.

In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just a dinner for himself and
his four helpers; but he was troubled and fell in no mood for it.

The dining-room was bare except for a table and chairs, but
the food was good, and there was good wine: Frodo‟s wine had not been included in the sale to the
Sackville-Bagginses.

„Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get their claws on it, at any rate I
have found a good home for this!‟ said Frodo, as he drained his glass.

„Well, see you later – the day after
tomorrow, if you don‟t go to sleep on the way!‟
Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind.

After that, if Gandalf
wanted him urgently, he would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first.

For Frodo was
going on foot.

„It‟s going to be a fine night,‟ he said
aloud.

„That‟s good for a beginning.

I am
going to start, and Gandalf must follow me.‟ He turned to go back, and then slopped, for he heard
voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row.

„No, Mr. Baggins has gone away.

Yes, sold out and gone, I tell‟ee.

Good night to you!‟
Footsteps went away down the Hill.

„I am sick of questions and curiosity about my doings, I
suppose,‟ he thought.

„What an inquisitive lot they all are!‟ He had half a mind to go and ask the
Gaffer who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and walked quickly
back to Bag End.

We are not going through the village tonight.

„Good-bye!‟ said Frodo, looking at
the dark blank windows.

„It is good for him.

He‟s got nothing except what he
ordered us to pack.

Are you going to sleep on
your legs?

„If we get to the other side of this hill, we shall find a
spot that is sheltered and snug enough, sir.

These
tree-roots would do them good.‟

Have you got the bath-water hot?‟
Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary.

Touched with gold and red the autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea.

When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good fire going.

„We thought you had gone to find some,‟ said
Pippin, busy setting out the food, and cups.

„You had better go now.‟
„You can come too,‟ said Frodo, „and bring all the water-bottles.‟ There was a stream at the
foot of the hill.

After some miles, however, the road
ceased to roll up and down: it climbed to the top of a steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way,
and then prepared to go down for the last time.

„The road goes on for ever,‟ said Pippin; „but I can‟t without a rest.

Suddenly he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.

Now far ahead the Road has gone,

„It came to me then, as if I was making it up; but I may have heard
it long ago.

“It‟s a dangerous business, Frodo, going out of your
door,” he used to say.

Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through
Mirkwood, and that if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain or even further and to
worse places?”

After a rest they had a good lunch, and then more rest.

I‟ve never seen or fell anything like it in the Shire before.‟
„But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?‟ said Pippin.

And I know where he‟s
going to.‟
„What do you mean?‟ said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.

It was like this: when I got back to our hole yesterday
evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: Hello, Sam!

There’s been a strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and
he’s only just gone.

He seemed
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left his old home for good.

We ought to do a good step more today.

The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and evening was coming on before
they came back to the road at the end of the long level over which it had run straight for some miles.

Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,
Let them go!

Let them go!

„Don‟t let us go too far!‟ said Frodo.

They had no time to find any hiding-place better than the general
darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back
a few yards towards the lane.

„Can‟t we go and see
them?‟
„Listen!

What is the meaning of it?‟
„The meaning of it, fair people,‟ said Frodo, „is simply that we seem to be going the same way
as you are.

„And how do
you know that we go the same way as you, for you do not know whither we are going?‟

We are Exiles, and most of our kindred have long ago departed and we too are
now only tarrying here a while, ere we return over the Great Sea.

„Why do you ask about Black Riders?‟
„Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one has done so twice,‟ said Pippin;
„only a little while ago he slipped away as you drew near.‟
The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly in their own tongue.

This is good fortune beyond my hope,‟ said Pippin.

Bilbo was a good master.

Where are you going?‟ asked Frodo.

„For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall.

Pippin soon
began to feel sleepy, and staggered once or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm
and saved him from a fall.

Then by some shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like
a veil, and there leaned up, as he climbed over the rim of the world, the Swordsman of the Sky,
Menelvagor with his shining belt.

In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily.

If ever you are our guests at home, we will treat you better.‟
„It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,‟ said Frodo.

But he remembered that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one
who is starving; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended fruits of gardens; he
drained a cup that was filled with a fragrant draught, cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer
afternoon.

The nearest he ever
got was to say: „Well, sir, if I could grow apples like that, I would call myself a gardener.

When Pippin had gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo‟s feet, where at last he nodded
and closed his eyes.

They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo questioned Gildor much about
happenings in the wide world outside the Shire.

At last Frodo asked the question
that was nearest to his heart:
„Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?‟
Gildor smiled.

„But I already
know a little, and I can read more in your face and in the thought behind your questions.

You are
leaving the Shire, and yet you doubt that you will find what you seek, or accomplish what you
intend, or that you will ever return.

Is not that so?‟
„It is,‟ said Frodo; „but I thought my going was a secret known only to Gandalf and my
faithful Sam.‟ He looked down at Sam, who was snoring gently.

He was to have come to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but he has never
appeared.

The choice is yours: to go or wait.‟
„And it is also said,‟ answered Frodo: „Go not to the Elves for counsel, for they will say both
no and yes.’

I think you should now go at once, without
delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone.

But my heart forbodes that, ere all is
ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, will know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion.

May
Elbereth protect you!‟
„But where shall I find courage?‟ asked Frodo.

„Be of good hope!

In the
morning we shall have gone; but we will send our messages through the lands.

The Wandering
Companies shall know of your journey, and those that have power for good shall be on the watch.

The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night.

„But I hope to get across the river
without their seeing us.‟
„Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?‟
„Not much – only hints and riddles,‟ said Frodo evasively.

I don‟t want to answer a string of questions while I am eating.

I want to
think!‟

„Good heavens!‟ said Pippin.

I am leaving the Shire as soon as ever I can – in fact I
have made up my mind now not even to wait a day at Crickhollow, if it can be helped.‟
„Very good,

sir!‟
„You still mean to come with me?‟
„I do.‟
„It is going to be very dangerous, Sam.

I am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon,
and if any of those Black Riders try to stop him, they’ll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with , I said.

We had some talk last night; and they seemed to know you were going away,
so I didn‟t see the use of denying it.

I know we are going to take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can‟t
turn back.

It isn‟t to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want – I don‟t rightly know
what I want: but I have something to do before the end, and it lies ahead, not in the Shire.

But I understand that Gandalf chose me a good companion.

We will go together.‟
Frodo finished his breakfast in silence.

We slept late;
and there are a good many miles to go.‟
‘You slept late, you mean,‟ said Pippin.

And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry as quickly as
possible.

I am not going out of the way, back to the road we left last night: I am going to cut straight
across country from here.‟
„Then you are going to fly,‟ said Pippin.

It goes round the north end of the Marish so as to strike the causeway from the Bridge above
Stock.

We could save a quarter of the distance if we made a line for
the Ferry from where we stand.‟
‘Short cuts make long delays,’ argued Pippin.

And if you
are worrying about Black Riders, I can‟t see that it is any worse meeting them on a road than in a
wood or a field.‟
„It is less easy to find people in the woods and fields,‟ answered Frodo.

I had
counted on passing the Golden Perch at Stock before sundown.

At all costs
we must keep you away from the Golden Perch.

What
do you say, Sam?‟
„I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,‟ said Sam (in spite of private misgiving and a deep
regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).

„Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let‟s go now!‟ said Pippin.

Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a
straight line.

They at once gave up any idea of going back.

The short cut has
gone crooked already; but we got under cover only just in time.

You‟ve got sharp ears, Sam: can
you hear anything coming?‟
They stood still, almost holding their breath as they listened; but there was no sound of
pursuit.

„I don‟t fancy he would try bringing his horse down that bank,‟ said Sam.

We had better be going on.‟
Going on was not altogether easy.

When they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired
and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in which they were going.

„If we are going to try and get back on to our

course, we must cross at once and bear right.‟
They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown and treeless, on the
further side.

It is not a very broad belt –I should have said no more
than a mile at the widest – and we ought to have been through it by now.‟
„It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,‟ said Frodo.

Let us
keep on as we are going!

When they came to make their meal, they found that the Elves had
filled their bottles with a clear drink, pale golden in colour: it had the scent of a honey made of
many flowers, and was wonderfully refreshing.

Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go

Rain may fall and wind may blow,
And many miles be still to go,

But under a tall tree I will lie,
And let the clouds go sailing by.

They were now reluctant either to stay or go on; but sooner or later they had got to get across the
open country to the Ferry, and it was best to go sooner and in daylight.

„This is Bamfurlong, old Farmer Maggot‟s land.

That‟s his farm away there in the trees.‟
„One trouble after another!‟ said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed as if Pippin had
declared the lane was the slot leading to a dragon‟s den.

„What‟s wrong with old Maggot?‟ asked Pippin.

„He‟s a good friend to all the Brandybucks.

I have never got over the fright – though I daresay the beasts knew their business and
would not really have touched me.‟
Pippin laughed.

Old Maggot is really a stout fellow – if you leave his mushrooms alone.

He is a friend of Merry‟s,
and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.‟
They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs of a large house and
farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead.

The Maggots, and the Puddifoots of Stock, and
most of the inhabitants of the Marish, were house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick
and had a high wall all round it.

„Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!‟ said Pippin.

I was just going out to set my dogs on any strangers.

There are
some funny things going on today.

He was a funny customer and asking funny questions.

I‟ve a drop of good ale on tap, if you and
your friends are willing, Mr. Took.‟
It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do it in his own time and

fashion, so they all accepted the invitation.

„Heel, Wolf!‟ To the relief of Frodo and Sam, the dogs walked away and let them
go free.

But Farmer Maggot took him by the
arm.

Mrs. Maggot brought out
beer in a huge jug, and filled four large mugs.

It was a good brew, and Pippin found himself more
than compensated for missing the Golden Perch .

He had a
natural mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not disposed to be
quick friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however long ago.

After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural prospects (which were no worse
than usual), Farmer Maggot put down his mug and looked at them all in turn.

„Now, Mr. Peregrin,‟ he said, „where might you be coming from, and where might you be
going to?

For, if so, you had gone past my gate without my seeing
you.‟
„Well, no,‟ answered Pippin.

„To tell you the truth, since you have guessed it, we got into the
lane from the other end: we had come over your fields.

What do you think that funny customer asked me?‟
They waited anxiously for him to go on.

We don‟t see many
of the Big Folk over the border; and anyway I had never heard of any like this black fellow.
„ “Good-day to you!”

I says, going out to him.

“This lane don‟t lead anywhere, and wherever
you may be going, your quickest way will be back to the road.”

You
had better go back west to Hobbiton – but you can go by road this time.”
„ “Baggins has left,” he answered in a whisper.

I wish to
find him.

I will come back with gold.”
„ “No you won‟t,” I said.

“You‟ll go back where you belong, double quick.

„Then I‟ll tell you what to think,‟ said Maggot.

„You should never have gone mixing yourself
up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo.

When I heard you had left
the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you were going to find trouble.

His money was got in some
strange fashion in foreign parts, they say.

Maybe there is some that want to know what has become
of the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?‟
Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were rather disconcerting.

„Well, Mr. Frodo,‟ Maggot went on, „I‟m glad that you‟ve had the sense to come back to
Buckland.

Maggot looked at him thoughtfully.

„But we have got to try and get there; and it won‟t be done by
sitting and thinking.

So I am afraid we must be going.

I‟ve been in terror of you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you
may laugh to hear it.

It‟s a pity: for I‟ve missed a good friend.

But I‟ll come back, perhaps, one day – if I get a chance.‟
„You‟ll be welcome when you come,‟ said Maggot.

It‟s near sundown
already, and we are going to have our supper; for we mostly go to bed soon after the Sun.

„But we must be going at once, I‟m afraid.

I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I‟ll get out a small waggon,
and I‟ll drive you all to the Ferry.

That will save you a good step, and it might also save you trouble
of another sort.‟
Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin and Sam.

Two of Maggot‟s sons and his three
daughters came in, and a generous supper was laid on the large table.

Mrs. Maggot hustled in and out.

When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern and got the waggon
ready.

„You be careful of yourself, Maggot!‟ she called.

„Don‟t go arguing with any foreigners, and
come straight back!‟

Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north and south, but nothing could be seen
in the darkness, and there was not a sound in the still air.

„It‟s going to be thick,‟ said Maggot; „but I‟ll not light my lantern till I turn for home.

We‟ll
hear anything on the road long before we meet it tonight.‟
It was five miles or more from Maggot‟s lane to the Ferry.

The waggon seemed slower than a snail to Frodo.

Farmer Maggot drew in his ponies and the waggon creaked to a
halt.

Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies‟ heads, and peering forward into the
gloom.

„You get down in the waggon and
cover up with blankets, and we‟ll send this rider to the rightabouts!‟ He climbed out and went to the
farmer‟s side.

Black Riders would have to ride over him to get near the waggon.

„Hallo there!‟ called Farmer Maggot.

What do
you want, and where are you going?‟
„I want Mr. Baggins.

Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him.

„I was
beginning to wonder if you would turn up at all today, and I was just going back to supper.

Where did you find them, Mr. Maggot?

Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.‟
He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it.

„Well, good night to you all,‟

I‟ll not deny that I‟ll be glad now when I do.‟ He lit his lanterns,
and got up.

„Mrs. Maggot put this up for Mr. Baggins, with her compliments.‟

He handed it down and
moved off, followed by a chorus of thanks and good-nights.

Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one of the oldest in the Marish or
indeed in the Shire, had crossed the river, which was the original boundary of the land eastwards.

It had been planted many generations ago, and was now thick and tall, for it was
constantly tended.

He
scratched his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone on living
quietly at Bag End.

But as they looked it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as
if searching the ground.

„Thank goodness you don‟t keep any boats on the west-bank!‟ said Frodo.

„Can horses cross

the river?‟
„They can go twenty miles north to Brandywine Bridge – or they might swim,‟ answered
Merry.

We‟ll see about supper and things.‟
„We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,‟ said Frodo; „but we could do with another.‟
„You shall have it!

and I only got here with the last cart-load
yesterday.‟
Frodo looked round.

It seemed unfair to have
put his friends to all this trouble; and he wondered again how he was going to break the news to
them that he must leave them so soon, indeed at once.

„O blessed Meriadoc!‟
„Which order shall we go in?‟ said Frodo.

„Given to me by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among farmers‟ wives.
Take your greedy hands away, and I‟ll serve them.‟
Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even the greediest likings of Big People.

A
fact which partly explains young Frodo‟s long expeditions to the renowned fields of the Marish, and
the wrath of the injured Maggot.

I want a full account; and most of all I want to
know what was the matter with old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that.

„I should think you were making it all up,‟ said Merry, „if I had not seen that black shape on
the landing-stage – and heard the queer sound in Maggot‟s voice.

So far we have been given nothing more to go on than Farmer Maggot‟s guess that it has something
to do with old Bilbo‟s treasure.‟
„That was only a guess,‟ said Frodo hastily.

„Maggot does not know anything.‟
„Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,‟ said Merry.

„A lot goes on behind his round face that does

not come out in his talk.

I‟ve heard that he used to go into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the
reputation of knowing a good many strange things.

But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you
think his guess good or bad.‟
„I think,’ answered Frodo slowly, „that it was a good guess, as far as it goes.

There is a
connexion with Bilbo‟s old adventures, and the Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought to say
searching , for him or for me.

I have got something to tell you all.

But I don‟t know quite how to
begin.‟
„I think I could help you,‟ said Merry quietly, „by telling you some of it myself.‟

„Just this, my dear old Frodo: you
are miserable, because you don‟t know how to say good-bye.

But danger has come on you sooner than you expected, and now you are making up your
mind to go at once.

You have obviously been planning to
go and saying farewell to all your haunts all this year since April.

And all those close talks with Gandalf.‟
„Good heavens!‟ said Frodo.

I thought you would
go after him sooner or later; indeed I expected you to go sooner, and lately we have been very
anxious.

We have been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your
own like he did.

Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and done a good deal of
planning on our own account.

You are not going to escape so easily!‟
„But I must go,‟ said Frodo.

„It cannot be helped, dear friends.

Since you have guessed so much, please help me and do not
hinder me!‟

„You must go – and therefore we must, too.

Sam is an excellent fellow, and would jump down a dragon‟s throat to save
you, if he did not trip over his own feet; but you will need more than one companion in your
dangerous adventure.‟
„My dear and most beloved hobbits!‟ said Frodo deeply moved.

I
decided that long ago, too.

We
know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but we are going to do our best to help you against the
Enemy.‟
„The Ring!‟ said Frodo, now completely amazed.

If you want to know how I first found out, I will
tell you.‟
„Go on!‟ said Frodo faintly.

I was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary fashion; but I
got through the hedge and walked along the field inside.

I caught a
glint of gold as he put something back in his trouser-pocket.

„Good heavens above!

Have you got it, Frodo?‟
„No.

Merry proceeded, „I kept my knowledge to myself, till this Spring
when things got serious.

After which, I may say, he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.‟
„Sam!‟ cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further, and quite unable to decide
whether he felt angry, amused, relieved, or merely foolish.

He has some sense, mind you; and when you said go alone , he said
no!

But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off without a word.

We
know a good deal about the Ring.

Even so, I cannot help feeling happy; happier than I have felt for
a long time.

„Good!

Merry and Pippin began a song, which they had apparently got ready for the
occasion.

It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on his adventure long ago, and

went to the same tune:

„Very good!‟ said Frodo.

„But in that case there are a lot of things to do before we go to bed –
under a roof, for tonight at any rate.‟
„Oh!

„I fear those Black Riders, and I am sure it is unsafe to stay
in one place long, especially in a place to which it is known I was going.

It will take a good deal of
preparation.‟
„The answer to the second question,‟ said Merry, „is that we could get off in an hour.

Even in the
daylight they would try to keep them out, I think, at any rate until they got a message through to the
Master of the Hall – for they would not like the look of the Riders, and would certainly be
frightened by them.

But I am not going by road: it would be safer to wait here than that.

If I go through the North-gate my departure from Buckland will be known at once, instead of being
secret for several days at least, as it might be.

The only thing to do is to go off
in a quite unexpected direction.‟
„But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!‟ said Fredegar horrified.

People don‟t go in there.‟
„

„The Brandybucks go in – occasionally when the fit takes them.

Frodo went in once, long ago.

„I am more afraid of the Old Forest than of
anything I know about: the stories about it are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not
going on the journey.

He had even brought along some old
clothes of Frodo‟s to help him in playing the part.

I don‟t know whether these Riders can read or not, of course, but I
should not have dared to risk a written message, in case they got in and searched the house.

But if
Fatty is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we have gone, that
decides me.

I am going into the Old Forest first thing tomorrow.‟

„You‟ll wish you were back here
with me before this time tomorrow.‟
„It‟s no good arguing about it any more,‟ said Merry.

„We have still got to tidy up and put the
finishing touches to the packing, before we get to bed.

I shall call you all before the break of day.‟
When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some time.

I am just going to saddle the ponies, and
fetch the one that is to be the baggage-carrier.

In their shed they found the ponies; sturdy little beasts of the kind loved by hobbits, not
speedy, but good for a long day‟s work.

„How are you going to get through this?‟ asked Fredegar.

„Good-bye, Frodo!‟ he said.

„I wish you were not going into the
Forest.

But good luck to you – today
and every day!‟
„If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be lucky,‟ said Frodo.

„Tell
Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we shall soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.‟
„Good-bye!‟ they cried, and rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar‟s sight into the
tunnel.

Merry got
down and unlocked the gate, and when they had all passed through he pushed it to again.

„If you mean the old bogey-stories
Fatty‟s nurses used to tell him, about goblins and wolves and things of that sort, I should say no.

Everything in it is very much more alive,
more aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things are in the Shire.

In fact long ago they attacked the Hedge: they came and
planted themselves right by it, and leaned over it.

Whenever
one comes inside one finds open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time to time in a
queer fashion.

That is the path I am going to try and find.‟
The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the wide hollow.

„You had better lead on and find that path,‟ Frodo said to
him.

For the moment there
was no whispering or movement among the branches; but they all got an uncomfortable feeling that
they were being watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity.

„I am not going to do anything.

It does more harm than good.‟
Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, and if he had been right to
make the others come into this abominable wood.

Merry was looking from side to side, and seemed
already uncertain which way to go.

They were still
climbing gently, but they now went much quicker, and with better heart; for it seemed to them that
the Forest had relented, and was going to let them pass unhindered after all.

For though dark they stand,
all woods there be must end at last,
and see the open sun go past:

the setting sun, the rising sun,
the day‟s end, or the day begun.

He was, indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (if that was still possible), when
things took a new turn.

The dark
trees drew aside, and ahead they could see the path going almost straight forward.

Near at hand the mist was now almost gone; though here and there it lay in
hollows of the wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep fold cutting right across the Forest, the
fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.

We don‟t want to go that way!

That cheered them
greatly; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyond the wood‟s borders, though they did not
mean to go that way, if they could help it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister a reputation in
hobbit-legend as the Forest itself.

At length they made up their minds to go on again.

At first their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair speed, though whenever they
got a glimpse of the sun in an open glade they seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards.

Each time they climbed down
they found the hollow filled with thick bushes and matted undergrowth, which somehow would not
yield to the left, but only gave way when they turned to the right; and they had to go some distance
along the bottom before they could find a way up the further bank.

Each time they clambered out,
the trees seemed deeper and darker; and always to the left and upwards it was most difficult to find
a way, and they were forced to the right and downwards.

After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though they knew well enough
that they had long ceased to go northward at all.

A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy upon the hidden land between.

I will go on and
explore.‟
He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long grasses.

„That is, if the track goes on so far, and does not simply lead us into
a bog and leave us there.

And have you any idea how far eastward we should have to go?‟
„No,‟ said Merry, „I haven‟t.

Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod.

„It‟s no good,‟ he heard Merry saying.

„Can‟t go another step without rest.
Must have nap.

But the others were too far gone to care.

Enormous it looked, its sprawling
branches going up like reaching arms with many long-fingered hands, its knotted and twisted trunk
gaping in wide fissures that creaked faintly as the boughs moved.

„Must bathe feet a minute.‟
Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the tree, where great winding
roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled dragonets straining down to drink.

He
found that two had wandered on a good way along the path; and he had just caught them and
brought them back towards the others, when he heard two noises; one loud, and the other soft but
very clear.

„I suppose we haven‟t got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?‟ asked Sam.

„If it don‟t let
them go, I‟ll have it down, if I have to gnaw it.‟ He ran to the ponies and before long came back
with two tinder-boxes and a hatchet.

But Frodo, without any clear idea of why he did so, or what he hoped for, ran along the
path crying help! help!

help!

Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.

Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing
Comes hopping home again.

derry dol! and merry-o,
Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!

Tom‟s going home again water-lilies bringing.

At
any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite tall enough for one of the Big People,
though he made noise enough for one, slumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and
charging through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink.

„Help!‟ cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands stretched out.

„Now, my little fellows, where be you a-going to, puffing like a
bellows?

Go
to sleep!

Goldberry is waiting.

Time enough for questions around
the supper table.

Tom soon disappeared in front of them, and the noise of his singing
got fainter and further away.

Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle!
Tom‟s going on ahead candles for to kindle.

Tom goes on before you.

And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a golden light was all about
them.

Her long yellow hair

rippled down her shoulders; her gown was green, green as young reeds, shot with silver like beads
of dew; and her belt was of gold, shaped like a chain of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes of
forget-me-nots.

„Enter, good guests!‟ she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was her clear voice they had
heard singing.

But before they could
say anything, she sprang lightly up and over the lily-bowls, and ran laughing towards them; and as
she ran her gown rustled softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river.

I am Goldberry,
daughter of the River.‟

„Fair lady
Goldberry!‟ said Frodo at last, feeling his heart moved with a joy that he did not understand.

„Fair lady Goldberry!‟ he said again.

But Goldberry laughed.

He is tending your tired
beasts.‟
The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry busied herself about
the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slender grace of her movement filled them with quiet
delight.

„Tell me, if my asking does not seem foolish, who
is Tom Bombadil?‟
„He is,‟ said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling.

Frodo looked at her questioningly.

He laughed, and going to Goldberry, took her hand.

„Here‟s my Goldberry clothed all in
silver-green with flowers in her girdle!

Is the supper ready?‟
„It is,‟ said Goldberry; „but the guests perhaps are not?‟
Tom clapped his hands and cried: „Tom, Tom!

your guests are tired, and you had near
forgotten!

Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated at the table, two on each side,
while at either end sat Goldberry and the Master.

At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly.

Then Goldberry came and stood before them, holding a
candle; and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep.

For nothing passes
door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.

Good night!‟ She
passed out of the room with a glimmer and a rustle.

Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them tried to muster the courage to
ask one of the many questions he had meant to ask at supper.

Each year at summer‟s end I go to find them for her,
in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;
there they open first in spring and there they linger latest.

By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.

And that proved well for you – for now I shall no longer
go down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old.

He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more question: the one he most
desired to have answered.

It will

find its way in, and then I shall drown.‟ He felt that he was lying in a soft slimy bog, and springing
up he set his fool on the corner of a cold hard flagstone.

He seemed to hear or remember hearing: „Nothing passes doors or windows save
moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.‟ A little breath of sweet air moved the curtain.

„Good morning, merry friends!‟ cried Tom, opening the eastern window wide.

I wakened Goldberry singing under window; but nought wakes
hobbit-folk in the early morning.

If you come soon you‟ll find breakfast on the table.

Neither Tom nor Goldberry
were there.

As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was flowing down the rain
out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing up above them.

The thought of going had been heavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he
guessed now that they would not go further that day.

Frodo stood near the open door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and
go bubbling away down into the valley.

„This is Goldberry‟s washing day,‟ he said, „and her autumn-cleaning.

It‟s a good day for long tales, for questions and for answers, so
Tom will start the talking.‟
He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes half as if speaking to himself,
sometimes looking at them suddenly with a bright blue eye under his deep brows.

He told them tales of bees
and flowers, the ways of trees, and the strange creatures of the Forest, about the evil things and
good things, things friendly and things unfriendly, cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden
under brambles.

Tom‟s words laid bare the hearts of trees and
their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with a hatred of things that go free
upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers.

It was not
called the Old Forest without reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten woods;
and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker than the hills, the fathers of the fathers of trees,
remembering times when they were lords.

Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens; and mounds covered them, and the stone
doors were shut; and the grass grew over all.

Barrow-wights walked in the hollow places with a clink of rings on cold fingers, and
gold chains in the wind.‟ Stone rings grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight.

The hobbits sat still before him, enchanted; and it seemed as
if, under the spell of his words, the wind had gone, and the clouds had dried up, and the day had
been withdrawn, and darkness had come from East and West, and all the sky was filled with the
light of white stars.

When they turned again, Goldberry stood in the door behind, framed in light.

And long listening‟s
hungry work, morning, noon, and evening!‟ With that he jumped out of his chair, and with a bound
took a candle from the chimney-shelf and lit it in the flame that Goldberry held; then he danced
about the table.

Then Tom and Goldberry set the table;
and the hobbits sat half in wonder and half in laughter: so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so
merry and odd the caperings of Tom.

„Supper is ready,‟ said Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was
clothed all in silver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like fishes‟ mail.

After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs that began merrily in the
hills and fell softly down into silence; and in the silences they saw in their minds pools and waters
wider than any they had known, and looking into them they saw the sky below them and the stars
like jewels in the depths.

Then once more she wished them each good night and left them by the
fireside.

But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them with questions.

It no longer surprised them; but he made no secret that he owed his recent
knowledge largely to Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more importance
than they had imagined.

Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that Frodo found himself
telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears than he had told before even to Gandalf.

For a second the hobbits had a vision, both comical and
alarming, of his bright blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold.

He waited for an opportunity, when the talk was going again, and
Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and their queer ways – then he slipped the Ring on.

He got up and crept quietly away from the fireside towards
the outer door.

Where be you a-going?

Take off your golden ring!

„I am no weather-master,‟ he said; „nor is aught that goes
on two legs.‟
By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from his house, over the western and
lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope in that way to strike the East Road in a day‟s journey,
and avoid the Barrows.

you go a-meddling with old stone or cold Wights or prying in
their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts that never falter!‟ He said this more than once;
and he advised them to pass barrows by on the west-side, if they chanced to stray near one.

Outside everything was green
and pale gold.

Tom came out of the house and waved his hat and danced upon the doorstep,
bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good speed.

'Goldberry!'

It seemed fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of
the downs towards the Road, when they should be leaping, as lusty as Tom, over the stepping stones
of the hills straight towards the Mountains.

Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts.

Turning back, when they
reached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small and slender like a sunlit
flower against the sky: she was standing still watching them, and her hands were stretched out
towards them.

„If we make as good going this afternoon as we have done this
morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and be jogging on in search of a camping
place.'

There they took food and drink, and made as good
a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came from 'down under Hill'.

When they reached the bottom it was so
cold that they halted and got out cloaks and hoods, which soon became bedewed with grey drops.

Their thoughts did not go beyond that, except for a vague hope that perhaps away
beyond the Downs there might be no fog.

Their going was very slow.

He plunged off in the direction of the
call, and found himself going steeply uphill.

'Frodo!
Hoy!' came the thin voices out of the mist: and then a cry that sounded like help, help!

often
repeated, ending with a last help!

He stumbled
forward with all the speed he could towards the cries; but the light was now gone, and clinging
night had closed about him, so that it was impossible to be sure of any direction.

He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no longer felt limp like a helpless prey.

About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that
light they looked cold and unlovely.

On their heads were circlets, gold chains were about their
waists, and on their fingers were many rings.

In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land.

He wondered if he put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight
would miss him, and he might find some way out.

Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,
Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!

Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness,
Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended.

You must help me bear
them.'

When he came
out he was bearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things of gold, silver, copper, and bronze;
many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments.

They looked about in amazement, first at Frodo, and then at Tom standing
large as life on the barrow-top above them; and then at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned
and belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.

'What in the name of wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet that had slipped over
one eye.

Let us go on!'
'Dressed up like this, sir?

He flung his circlet, belt, and
rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly, as if he expected to find his cloak, jacket, and
breeches, and other hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand.

'You won't find your clothes again,' said Tom, bounding down from the mound, and laughing
as he danced round them in the sunlight.

Run naked on the grass, while
Tom goes a-hunting!'

Then they lay basking in the sun with the delight of those that have been wafted suddenly
from bitter winter to a friendly clime, or of people that, after being long ill and bedridden, wake one
day to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of promise.

For they sniff danger ahead which you walk right into;

and if they run to save themselves, then they run the right way.

See,
here they come again, bringing all their burdens!'

When your ponies stayed with me, they got to know my Lumpkin;
and they smelt him in the night, and quickly ran to meet him.

But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old Tom's going to ride.

The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom many times; but he laughed, and
said that they were so good at losing themselves that he would not feel happy till he had seen them
safe over the borders of his land.

„I've got things to do,' he said, 'my making and my singing, my
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country.

Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.'

He bade
them lie there 'free to all finders, birds, beasts.

Fair was she who long ago wore this on her
shoulder.

Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not forget her!'

For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen, of marvellous
workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold.

'Sharp blades are good to
have, if Shire-folk go walking, east, south, or far away into dark and danger.'

Then he told them that
these blades were forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the Dark
Lord, but they were overcome by the evil king of Carn Dum in the Land of Angmar.

'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured, 'yet still some go wandering, sons of forgotten
kings walking in loneliness, guarding from evil things folk that are heedless.'

They looked back and saw the top of the old mound on the hill, and from it
the sunlight on the gold went up like a yellow flame.

Tom said that it
had once been the boundary of a kingdom, but a very long lime ago.

They would soon now be going forward into lands wholly
strange to them, and beyond all but the most vague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the
gathering twilight they longed for home.

They
stood silent, reluctant to make the final parting, and only slowly became aware that Tom was
wishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting.
'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that your own luck must go with
you and guide you): four miles along the Road you'll come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill,
with doors looking westward.

There you'll find an old inn that is called The Prancing Pony .

Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!

I
reckon we may go a good deal further and see naught better, nor queerer.

I hope it'll be like The Green Dragon away back
home!

The Pony is a good inn by all accounts.

Towards it they now hurried desiring only to find a fire, and a
door between them and the night.

When they appeared they brought news from
afar, and told strange forgotten tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make
friends of them.

It
was not yet forgotten that there had been a time when there was much coming and going between
the Shire and Bree.

Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the foot of the hill, there was a
large inn.

It had been built long ago when the traffic on the roads had been far greater.

Strange as News from Bree was still a saying in the Eastfarthing, descending from
those days, when news from North, South, and East could be heard in the inn, and when the
Shire-hobbits used to go more often to hear it.

'We are journeying east and cannot go
further tonight.'
'Hobbits!

What may your names be, might I ask?'
'Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem a good place to discuss
them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of the man or the tone of his voice.

'Your business is your own, no doubt,' said the man; 'but it's my business to ask questions
after nightfall.'

But you'll find maybe that more folk
than old Harry at the gate will be asking you questions.

If you go on to

The Pony , you'll find you're not the only guests.'

He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see in the lantern-light
that the man was still eyeing them curiously.

He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees,
and other creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in the course of his journey; but at the
moment he was finding his first sight of Men and their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much
for the dark end of a tiring day.

'We surely aren't going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?'

They listened to this encouraging sound for a moment
and then got off their ponies.

'Good evening, little master!'

'It's gone again!

Well find him!

I haven't
got six legs, nor six eyes neither!

He must find
room somehow.'

'Well, now, what was I going to say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his forehead.

I'm that busy tonight, my head is going round.

Then there's a travelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening.

But we've got a room or two in the north
wing that were made special for hobbits, when this place was built.

'And shall I show you the
bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?'
They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr. Butterbur and Nob
came in again.

There was hot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart,
new loaves, slabs of butter, and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could
show, and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam's misgivings (already much relieved by the
excellence of the beer).

'Perhaps
you would rather go to your beds.

So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their supper (about three quarters of
an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to
join the company.

'I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, and
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air.

The gathering was large and mixed, as
Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used to the light.

The Men of Bree seemed all to have
rather botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heathertoes,
Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention Butterbur).

And if that was not
enough, he was given a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he could
go for further information.

But after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign of writing a book on
the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about doings in the Shire.

There was trouble away in the South, and it seemed that the Men
who had come up the Greenway were on the move, looking for lands where they could find some
peace.

'If room isn't found
for them, they'll find it for themselves.

Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the roof of the Town
Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had
been buried in chalk, and came out like a floured dumpling.

But there were several questions asked
that made Frodo a little uneasy.

Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to Mr. Butterbur.

Goes about at a great
pace on his long shanks; though he don't tell nobody what cause he has to hurry.

Master –
Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'
'He did,' said Frodo stiffly.

It was a harmless enough tale for most of the local hobbits, no doubt: just
a funny story about those funny people away beyond the River; but some (old Butterbur, for
instance) knew a thing or two, and had probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo's vanishing.

It
would bring the name of Baggins to their minds, especially if there had been inquiries in Bree after
that name.

Some of the hobbits looked at Frodo and laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr.
Underhill had taken as much ale as was good for him.

He spoke 'a few suitable
words', as they would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratified by the kindness of your
reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will help to renew the old ties of friendship
between the Shire and Bree; and then he hesitated and coughed.

The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;
When there's good cheer among the guests,
He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.

Frodo had a good voice, and the song tickled their fancy.
'Where's old Barley?' they cried.

Much too vigorously; for he
came down, bang, into a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off the table with a crash, clatter,
and bump!

He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the floor
without leaving a hole!

Presently he slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed
southerner: the two had been whispering together a good deal during the evening.

He could only suppose
that he had been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that somehow it had slipped on when
he stuck out his hand with a jerk to save his fall.

He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.

Meanwhile an argument was going on by the fireplace.

There was too much of
that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air; or into thick air, as is more likely in this room.'
'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.

He's welcome to go where he will, so long as he pays in the morning.

The Dwarves and the two or three
strange Men that still remained got up and said good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his
friends.

But if you're going to do any more tumbling, or conjuring, or
whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand – and warn me .

Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight
o'clock?'
'Very good!

But before you go, I should like a word with you in private, Mr. Underhill.

He wondered how many private talks he would
have before he got to bed, and what they would reveal.

It was not until they had puffed up the embers into a blaze
and thrown on a couple of faggots that they discovered Strider had come with them.

'Who are you, and what do you want?'
'I am called Strider,' he answered: 'and though he may have forgotten it, your friend promised
to have a quiet talk with me.'
'You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,' said Frodo. 'What have you to
say?'
'Several things,' answered Strider. '

I mean just this: I will tell you what I know, and give you some good
advice – but I shall want a reward.'

'Even if I wanted another
companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I knew a good deal more about you, and your
business.'
'Excellent!' exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting back comfortably.

'You seem to be
coming to your senses again, and that is all to the good.

You may be glad to grant it,
when you have heard me.'
'Go on then!' said Frodo.

'But as for your business –' He got up
and went to the door, opened it quickly and looked out.

I wanted to find him quickly.

'I would have stopped your going into the
common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me in to see you, or take a message.'
'Do you think he–' began Frodo.

'I knew these horsemen were pursuing me; but
now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to have gone away.'
'You must not count on that!' said Strider sharply.

Not all of those

Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make mischief for
amusement.'
'What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?' said Frodo, still
determined not to understand Strider's hints.

You may escape from Bree, and be allowed to go forward
while the Sun is up; but you won't go far.

They will come on you in the wild, in some dark place
where there is no help.

Do you wish them to find you?

He comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of
such folk.

He knows something, that's plain, and more than I like; but it's no reason why we should
let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he puts it.'

I will answer some of your questions, if that
will help you to do so.

'I've come to bid you good night,' said the landlord, putting the candles on the table.

But first one thing
and then another this week have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope.

You see, I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of Baggins in
particular.'
'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo.
'Ah!

'I won't give you away; but I was told that
this Baggins would be going by the name of Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you
well enough, if I may say so.'
'Indeed!

'That won't help you much; it goes for most hobbits, Barley , he says to me,'
continued Mr. Butterbur with a glance at Pippin.

A wizard they say he is, but he's a good
friend of mine, whether or no.

Have you anyone you can send, and
trust to go?

I can find someone , I said, tomorrow, maybe, or the day after.

Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the
day after, and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thing after another drove it out of
my mind.

I'll do what I can to set matters right, and if there's any help I can give,
you've only to name it.
'Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less.

But you need ask no questions.

And if I'm not with him, he may be in
trouble, and he may need help.

I bid the black fellows be
off, and slammed the door on them; but they've been asking the same question all the way to
Archet, I hear.

And that Ranger, Strider, he's been asking questions, too.

'And much trouble would have
been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.'

'He came to offer me his help.'
'Well, you know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking suspiciously at
Strider.

They cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they
cannot go home.

Will you go with them and keep the black men
off?'
'Me?

What are all these queer goings on?
What are these black men after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?'
'I'm sorry I can't explain it all,' answered Frodo.

But if you mean to help me, I ought to warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in
your house.

From Mordor, Barliman, if that means
anything to you.'
'Save us!'

'Are you still willing to help me?'
'I am,' said Mr. Butterbur.

'Not much, Barliman, but every little
helps.

'But they'll find out he's here without help from me, I'm afraid.

The story of that Mr.
Bilbo's going off has been heard before tonight in Bree.

Good night, Mr. Baggins – Underhill, I should
say!

Good night – now, bless me!

They had forgotten all about Merry, and it was
getting late.

He said something about going for a breath of air.'
'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on a holiday!'

'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see your friend is let in when he comes.

Good night to you all!'

'When are you going to open that letter?'

I must go off at once.

I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow
you, if I find that you are gone.

He knows our business and will help you.

His true
name is Aragorn.

All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;

If I had got this at once, we might all
have been safe in Rivendell by now.

He writes as if he
was going into great danger.'
'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider.

'It would have saved
time.'
'Would it?

For all I knew I had to persuade you to trust me without proofs, if I was to help you.

You might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with
you.

'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will.'

All that is gold does not glitter, not
all those who wander are lost.'
'Did the verses apply to you then?'

'But I am Aragorn, and those verses go with that name.'

He
told me that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for Rivendell in the
last week of September.

And
that has proved ill; for plainly some news reached him, and I was not at hand to help.

When I returned, many days ago, I heard the ill news.

The tidings had
gone far and wide that Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen.

In spite of all the danger and worry I
must go to bed, or sleep where I sit.

It would be the last straw, if
we had to go out in the dark to look for him.'

There was no horse.'
'Which way did it go?'

'Go on!' said Frodo.

I could hardly help myself.

Then I felt terrified, and I turned back, and
was just going to bolt home, when something came behind me and I...

I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there was no signs of them, and
only Mr. Brandybuck lying by the roadside.

Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him,
he got up and ran back here like a hare.'

'What are we to do?'
'Stay here, and do not go to your rooms!

While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that had happened since
supper.

'Let us hope to hold the fort till morning.'
'Good night to you,' said Nob, and went off to take his part in the watch on the doors.

They talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to
ask.
'Jumped over the Moon!'

A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat in the breathless night-air.

I haven't got it!'

At last they got the idea that enemies were in
Buckland, some strange invasion from the Old Forest.

Meanwhile they had another errand: they knew now that the house was empty and the
Ring had gone.

'Guests
unable to sleep in their beds, and good bolsters ruined and all!

'But for the present you may be left in peace, when you have got rid
of us.

Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got ready, and to fetch them a 'bite'.

The stable-doors had all been opened
in the night, and they were gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the
place.

'Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,' he said at last, thoughtfully, as if he guessed
what Frodo had in mind.

'We should not go much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to
take.

I was going to walk in any case.

We cannot count on
getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take with us; and we ought to
take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way.

'The two or three riding-ponies that there were in Bree
were stabled in my yard, and they're gone.

Bob came back with the report that no
horse or pony was to be got for love or money in the neighbourhood – except one: Bill Ferny had
one that he might possibly sell.

Wouldn't the beast bolt back to him with all
our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?'
'I wonder,' said Strider.

'But I cannot imagine any animal running home to him, once it got
away.

Merry's ponies had escaped altogether, and
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in search of Fatty
Lumpkin.

But when
news of the events at Bree came to Tom's ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five
good beasts at a very fair price.

However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone for good, or for
bad.

'If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,' said Butterbur angrily, 'you
ought to pay for all the damage yourselves and not come shouting at me.

Go and ask Ferny where
your handsome friend is!'

It was close on ten o'clock before they at last got off.

'He looks more than half like a goblin.'

And you, Sammie, don't go ill-treating my poor old pony!

'Waste of a good apple,' said Sam
regretfully, and strode on.

The escort of children and stragglers that had followed
them got tired and turned back at the South-gate.

'Our last short cut through woods nearly ended in
disaster.'
'Ah, but you had not got me with you then,' laughed Strider. '

My cuts, short or long, don't go
wrong.'

His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the country, was to go towards
Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over
the wild lands to Weathertop Hill.

The marshes were
bewildering and treacherous, and there was no permanent trail even for Rangers to find through
their shifting quagmires.

They had not gone far on the fifth day when they left the last straggling pools and reed-beds
of the marshes behind them.

We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we
go straight towards it.

'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find.

'But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?'
'Yes; but the hope is faint.

If the Riders fail to
find us in the wilderness, they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves.

'I think,' answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, 'I think the best thing is to go as
straight eastward from here as we can, to make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop.

There we
can strike a path I know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north and less
openly.

'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is actually a good deal less
of me.

I hope the thinning process will not go on indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'
'Do not speak of such things!'

But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his star
in Mordor where the shadows are.

I didn't learn that part, it gave me the
shivers I never thought I should be going that way myself!'
'Going to Mordor!'

'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry
'I should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and were a sign that Gandalf was here
on October the third: that is three days ago now.

There have
been scorching flames here; and now the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes
back to my mind.

Suddenly he was aware that two black specks were moving slowly
along it, going westward; and looking again he saw that three others were creeping eastward to

meet them.

The light was no longer bright, for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping
out of the East had now overtaken the sun, as it began to go down.

Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill to find their companions.

At least
one set was made, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots.

All we could
do would be to go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills, where the land is
all much the same as it is here.

'I was very anxious to find some sign of
Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us to go up and stand there so long.

It is also as good a way of saying "here we are" as I can think of, bar
shouting.'

The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly places deserted by all the races
of the world.

Only on the Road would travellers be found, most often dwarves, hurrying
along on business of their own, and with no help and few words to spare for strangers.

'We have been careful enough in the
last few days, and this supper is no feast; but we have used more than we ought, if we have two
weeks still to go, and perhaps more.'
'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry, root, and herb; and I have some skill as a
hunter at need.

He knew many histories and legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and
the good and evil deeds of the Elder Days.

He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wander flowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.

And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.

Beren was a
mortal man, but Luthien was the daughter of Thingol, a King of Elves upon Middle-earth when the
world was young; and she was the fairest maiden that has ever been among all the children of this
world.

But the
Enemy was victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril came over the
Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the forest of Neldoreth.

Tinuviel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron, and together they
passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great Enemy from his throne, and took from
his iron crown one of the three Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the bride-price of Luthien to
Thingol her father.

But she chose mortality, and to die from the world,
so that she might follow him; and it is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering Seas, and
after a brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, long ago,
beyond the confines of this world.

For of
Beren and Luthien was born Dior Thingol's heir; and of him Elwing the White whom Earendil
wedded, he that sailed his ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril
upon his brow.

Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire.

I durstn't go outside this dell for
any money; I felt that something was creeping up the slope.'
'Did you see anything?'

Not with the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply
felt that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger.

They were too overjoyed to hear
him speak to answer for a while; nor did they understand his question.

That was now a good while
ago.

I cannot think why they have
gone and do not attack again.

Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!'

Then he
got up and walked away, and called Sam to him.

I will do
all I can to help and heal him.

'These leaves,' he said, 'I have walked far to find; for this plant does not grow in the bare hills;
but in the thickets away south of the Road I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.'

'It is fortunate that I
could find it, for it is a healing plant that the Men of the West brought to Middle-earth.

The others were discussing this very question.

In any case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night, and we can hardly
meet greater danger wherever we go.'

"I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,' said Strider.

It is a great water before it finds the Sea.

We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find
the Last Bridge held against us.'

Whether it was set there, or let fall by
chance, I cannot say; but it brings hope to me.

Men once dwelt here, ages
ago; but none remain now.

But that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the
land.'

As long as they could they avoided
climbing for Frodo's sake, and because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow
dales.

In the morning he woke to find that the rain had stopped.

He was going to climb
up, if he could, and get a look at the lie of the land.

'We have come too far to the north,' he said, 'and we
must find some way to turn back southwards again.

If we keep on as we are going we shall get up
into the Ettendales far north of Rivendell.

We could
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but it would take too
long, for I do not know the way, and our food would not last.

So somehow or other we must find the
Ford of Bruinen.'

They had a choice
between going back or climbing over it.

Even so they often despaired of getting their pony up, or
indeed of finding a path for themselves, burdened as they were.

The light was nearly gone, and they
were all exhausted, when at last they reached the top.

'We cannot go any further,' said Merry to Strider.

But I agree that we can go no
further tonight.'
'What is the matter with my master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking appealingly at Strider.
'His wound was small, and it is already closed.

They were now going more or less in the right direction.

'We cannot hope to find a path through these
hills.

They did not go far, for on the floor
lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance except some great empty jars
and broken pots.

But let us go on down warily, and we shall
see.'

But they had not gone very far
before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry.

We got a
sight of them through the tree-trunks.

Even
now he looked at the stone trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring
them to life again.

This many a year has Tim been gone,

Said Tom: 'I don't see why the likes o' thee
Without axin' leave should go makin' free
With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin;
So hand the old bone over!
Rover!

A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet!

'That must be the stone that marked the place where the trolls' gold was
hidden.

They were
going fast, with a light clippety-clippety-clip .

The rider's cloak streamed behind him, and his hood was
thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in the wind of his speed.

Mae govannen!

'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of Elrond,' said Strider.

He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered Glorfindel. '

'It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of Mitheithel, and left a token there,
nigh on seven days ago.

Since
then I have searched for your trail.

Two days ago I found it, and followed it over the Bridge; and
today I marked where you descended from the hills again.

Since you are here we must risk the peril of the Road and go.

There are five behind us, and
when they find your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the wind.

I fear that we may find the Ford is already held against
us.'

While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deepened.

'He can't go on riding after nightfall.

Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently in his arms he looked
in his face with grave anxiety.

Glorfindel shuddered as he took it, but
he looked intently at it.

Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach the house of Elrond!

I will do what I can – but all the more
do I urge you now to go on without rest.'

He searched the wound on Frodo's shoulder with his fingers, and his face grew graver, as if
what he learned disquieted him.

'You shall ride my horse,' said Glorfindel.

Glorfindel smiled.

It is you, Frodo, and
that which you bear that brings us all in peril.'

To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's white horse.

The
pony was laden instead with a great part of the others' burdens, so that they now marched lighter,
and for a time made good speed; but the hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift
tireless feet of the Elf.

They seemed hardly to have closed their eyes when Glorfindel, who had set himself to
watch while they slept, awoke them again.

The sun had now climbed far into the morning, and the
clouds and mists of the night were gone.

said Glorfindel to them, pouring for each in turn a little liquor from his
silver-studded flask of leather.

It was clear as spring water and had no taste, and it did not feel either
cool or warm in the mouth; but strength and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs as they drank
it.

Eaten after that draught the stale bread and dried fruit (which was now all that they had left)
seemed to satisfy their hunger better than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done.

Glorfindel still
urged them on, and only allowed two brief halts during the day's march.

So far there had been no
sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or hear; but often Glorfindel would halt and listen
for a moment, if they lagged behind, and a look of anxiety clouded his face.

But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the hobbits could go no further
that night.

There were many
miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and they hobbled forward at the best pace they could
manage.

'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,' said Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me
that the pursuit is now swift behind us, and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'

One moment Glorfindel turned and
listened, then he sprang forward with a loud cry.

Glorfindel and Strider
followed as rear-guard.

cried Glorfindel to Frodo.

cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called to the horse in the
elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth!

The
Riders behind were falling back: even their great steeds were no match in speed for the white
elf-horse of Glorfindel.

'Go back!'

'Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow me no more!'

To Mordor we will take you!'
'Go back!'

While he was
thinking of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his arriving in Rivendell,
there was a long silence, broken only by the soft puffs of Gandalf's pipe, as he blew white
smoke-rings out of the window.

Sam was here until I sent him off to get
some rest, about half an hour ago.'
'What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo.

That was touch and go: perhaps the
most dangerous moment of all.

'I wish you would tell me what happened!'

'All in good time!

'There are many powers in the world, for
good or for evil.

For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.'
'Yes,' said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us.

I think, not at any rate until we met Glorfindel.'
Gandalf smiled.

But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son of
Arathorn.

'I thought they had all vanished long ago.

They have helped me before; and I
shall need their help in the days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at
rest.'

'But so far my only thought has been to get here; and I hope I
shan't have to go any further.

I have had a month of exile and
adventure, and I find that has been as much as I want.'

'I have been reckoning,' he said,
'and I can't bring the total up to October the twenty-fourth.

'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.

It is not cold,' he added,
touching his left hand with his right.
'Good!' said Gandalf. '

It is gone now.

You
would have became a wraith under the dominion of the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented
you for trying to keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it and
seeing it on his hand.'
'Thank goodness

It is a marvel that
I escaped!'
'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf, 'not to mention courage.

All other animals are terrified when they
draw near, even the elf-horse of Glorfindel.

Was that
Glorfindel then?'
'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the mighty of the
Firstborn.

But all such places will soon become islands under siege, if things go on
as they are going.

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo.

They knew that nothing could save you, if the white horse could not.

On foot even Glorfindel and Aragorn together could not
withstand all the Nine at once.

There they hastily kindled fire; for
Glorfindel knew that a flood would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have
to deal with any that were left on his side of the river.

The moment the flood appeared, he rushed
out, followed by Aragorn and the others with flaming brands.

There is
great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.'
'Yes, it all comes back to me now,' said Frodo, 'the tremendous roaring.

'It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel and such great lords, not to
mention Strider, should take so much trouble and show me so much kindness.'
'Well, there are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling.

'I am one good reason.

And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.'
'Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily.

That house was, as Bilbo had
long ago reported, 'a perfect house, whether you like food or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or
just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all'.

He got out of bed and discovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it
ever had been.

Looking in a mirror he was startled to see a much thinner reflection of himself than he remembered:
it looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the
Shire; but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully.
'Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a looking-glass,' he said to his
reflection.

'Let's go and look for the rest of the party!'
'I can take you to them, sir,' said Sam. 'It's a big house this, and very peculiar.

Always a bit
more to discover, and no knowing what you'll find round a corner.

And the music
and the singing – not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening since we got here.

Elrond, as was his custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table
upon the dais; and next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.

Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of whom so many tales

spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left, Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he
thought he knew so well, were revealed as lords of dignity and power.

Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his face fair and young and
fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright and keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat
wisdom, and in his hand was strength.

The braids
of her dark hair were touched by no frost, her white arms and clear face were flawless and smooth,
and the light of stars was in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and
thought and knowledge were in her glance, as of one who has known many things that the years
bring.

Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted with small gems,
glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver.

Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor imagined in his mind; and he
was both surprised and abashed to find that he had a seat at Elrond's table among all these folk so
high and fair.

'I wonder greatly what brings
four hobbits on so long a journey.

'But I am equally curious,' he added, 'to learn
what brings so important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'

Frodo learned that
Grimbeorn the Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, and to their land between
the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
'Indeed,' said Gloin, 'if it were not for the Beornings, the passage from Dale to Rivendell
would long ago have become impossible.

They are good folk, the Bardings.

'There is much to tell, good and bad,' said Gloin; 'yet it is mostly good: we have so far been
fortunate, though we do not escape the shadow of these times.

He was
delighted to have found so polite a listener; for Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no
attempt to change the subject, though actually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of
people and places that he had never heard of before.

We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot
again make mail or blade to match those that were made before the dragon came.

Slowly the hall filled, and Frodo looked with delight upon the many fair faces that
were gathered together; the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair.

'So you have got here at last.

I have seen a good deal of you.

But as for the feast, I don't go in for such things much now.

I shall have to get my friend the Dunadan to help me.

'Then you two shall go into a corner and finish
your task, and we will hear it and judge it before we end our merrymaking.'

Messengers were sent
to find Bilbo's friend, though none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast.

'I got here without much adventure,' he said, 'and after a rest I went on with the
dwarves to Dale: my last journey.

Old Balin had gone away.

They sing them occasionally: just to please me, I think; for, of
course, they aren't really good enough for Rivendell.

It is a pity that Gandalf did not find out
more sooner.

I could have brought the thing here myself long ago without so much trouble.

I have

thought several times of going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let
me: Gandalf and Elrond, I mean.

It would do no good to you or to others, if
you tried to meddle with it again."

'Have you got it here?'

'I can't help feeling curious, you know, after all
I've heard.

I should very much like just to peep at it again.'
'Yes, I've got it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance.

Well, it can't be helped.

I
wonder if it's any good trying to finish my book?

I want your help in something urgent.

Let's go off into a corner and polish it up!'
Strider smiled.

Almost it

seemed that the words took shape, and visions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet
imagined opened out before him; and the firelit hall became like a golden mist above seas of foam
that sighed upon the margins of the world.

Then the enchantment became more and more
dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too
multitudinous for its pattern to be comprehended; it became part of the throbbing air about him, and
it drenched and drowned him.

In panoply of ancient kings,
in chained rings he armoured him;
his shining shield was scored with runes
to ward all wounds and harm from him;
his bow was made of dragon-horn,
his arrows shorn of ebony,
of silver was his habergeon,
his scabbard of chalcedony;
his sword of steel was valiant,
of adamant his helmet tall,
an eagle-plume upon his crest,
upon his breast an emerald.

The Silmaril she bound on him
and crowned him with the living light
and dauntless then with burning brow
he turned his prow; and in the night
from Otherworld beyond the Sea
there strong and free a storm arose,
a wind of power in Tarmenel;
by paths that seldom mortal goes
his boat it bore with biting breath
as might of death across the grey
and long-forsaken seas distressed:
from east to west he passed away.

Through Evernight he back was borne
on black and roaring waves that ran
o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores
that drowned before the Days began,
until he heard on strands of pearl
when ends the world the music long,
where ever foaming billows roll
the yellow gold and jewels wan.

He tarried there from errantry,
and melodies they taught to him,
and sages old him marvels told,
and harps of gold they brought to him.

From World's End then he turned away
and yearned again to find afar
his home through shadows journeying,
and burning as an island star
on high above the mists he came,
a distant flame before the Sun,
a wonder ere

Bilbo got up and bowed.

But really we cannot answer your question at one hearing!'
'What!'

He got up and came towards Frodo. '

What did you think of it?'
'I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling.

Except that Aragorn insisted on
my putting in a green stone.

They will be going on for a long time yet.

Come and go as you like, as long as you don't
make a noise.'

They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made for the doors.

To his surprise Frodo saw that
Aragorn stood beside her; his dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail,
and a star shone on his breast.

'I guess you mean that it is time your master
went to bed.'
'Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got up today for the first time.'

'You can trot off and tell Gandalf that he has gone to bed.

Good night, Frodo!

Bless me, but it has been good to see you again!

There are no folk like hobbits
after all for a real good talk.

Good night!

He walked along the terraces above
the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains, and shine
down slanting through the thin silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the
woven nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush.

Good morning!' said Bilbo.

'But most of all I should like to go walking today
and explore the valley.

Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back to the house;
behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten, trotted Sam.

Frodo saw Glorfindel
and Gloin; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes again.

Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by his side, and presented him to the company, saying:
'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo.

Beside Glorfindel there were several other counsellors of
Elrond's household, of whom Erestor was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey
Havens who had come on an errand from Cirdan the Shipwright.

There was also a strange Elf clad
in green and brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the King of the Elves of
Northern Mirkwood.

I have bidden him to be present, for here his questions will be
answered.'

'It is now many years ago,' said Gloin, 'that a shadow of disquiet fell upon our people.

But now we spoke of it again with longing, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the
doors of Khazad-dum for many lives of kings, save Thror only, and he perished.

At last, however,
Balin listened to the whispers, and resolved to go; and though Dain did not give leave willingly, he
took with him Ori and Oin and many of our folk, and they went away south.

"That was nigh on thirty years ago.

For a while we had news and it seemed good: messages
reported that Moria had been entered and a great work begun there.

"Then about a year ago a messenger came to Dain, but not from Moria – from Mordor: a
horseman in the night, who called Dain to his gate.

"As a small token only of your friendship
Sauron asks this," he said: "that you should find this thief," such was his word, "and get from him,
willing or no, a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole.

It is but a trifle that Sauron fancies,
and an earnest of your good will.

Find it, and three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall
be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever.

Find only news of the thief,
whether he still lives and where, and you shall have great reward and lasting friendship from the
Lord.

Twice the
messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered.

Believe rather that it is so ordered that we, who sit here,
and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world.

Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of Sauron and the Rings of Power, and
their forging in the Second Age of the world long ago.

Then Elendil the Tall and
his mighty sons, Isildur and Anarion, became great lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor,
and the South-realm in Gondor above the mouths of Anduin.

And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when
Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was not so.'

'But I thought,'
he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age
ago.'

'So it was indeed,' answered Elrond gravely.

Earendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin before its fall; and my mother was Elwing,
daughter of Dior, son of Luthien of Doriath.

I was at the Battle of Dagorlad
before the Black Gate of Mordor, where we had the mastery: for the Spear of Gil-galad and the
Sword of Elendil, Aiglos and Narsil, none could withstand.

'If ever
such a tale was told in the South, it has long been forgotten.

'In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while its splendour grew, recalling
somewhat of the might of Numenor, ere it fell.

Then the watch upon the walls of Mordor slept, and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth.

But the Lords of Minas Tirith still fight on, defying our
enemies, keeping the passage of the River from Argonath to the Sea.

Others shall speak of its finding, for in
that I played small part.'

'Give me leave, Master Elrond,' said he, 'first to say more of Gondor; for verily from the land
of Gondor I am come.

'Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of Numenor is spent, nor all its pride and
dignity forgotten.

Four only were
saved by swimming: my brother and myself and two others.

But still we fight on, holding all the
west shores of Anduin; and those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name:
much praise but little help.

Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to our father, Denethor, Lord of

Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of Gondor.

Loth
was my father to give me leave, and long have I wandered by roads forgotten, seeking the house of
Elrond, of which many had heard, but few knew where it lay.'
'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you,' said Aragorn, standing up.

'He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,' said Elrond; 'and he is descended through many fathers from
Isildur Elendil's son of Minas Ithil.

'It does not belong to either of us,' said Aragorn; 'but it has been ordained that you should hold
it for a while.'
'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly.

Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing.

But why then should we seek a broken sword?'
'The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith ,' said Aragorn. '

Do you wish for the House of Elendil to
return to the Land of Gondor?'
'I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaning of a riddle,' answered Boromir
proudly.

'Yet we are hard pressed, and the Sword of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope – if
such a thing could indeed return out of the shadows of the past.'

He looked again at Aragorn, and
doubt was in his eyes.

Standing suddenly up he burst out:
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;

'Not very good perhaps, but to the point – if you need more beyond the word of Elrond.

'I made that up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, 'for the Dunadan, a long time ago when he
first told me about himself.

I almost wish that my adventures were not over, and that I could go with
him when his day comes.'

Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again.

I have had a hard life and a
long; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor are a small part in the count of my journeys.

'If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have played another part.

What roads would any dare to tread, what safety would there
be in quiet lands, or in the homes of simple men at night, if the Dunedain were asleep, or were all
gone into the grave?
'And yet less thanks have we than you.

To some there Bilbo's tale was wholly new, and they listened with amazement while the old
hobbit, actually not at all displeased, recounted his adventure with Gollum, at full length.

Every step of his journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was

questioned and considered, and everything that he could recall concerning the Black Riders was
examined.

'You would have made a good story of it, if they hadn't kept on
interrupting.

I tried to make a few notes, but we shall have to go over it all again together some
time, if I am to write it up.

There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'
'Yes, it made quite a long tale,' answered Frodo.

I still want to know a good deal, especially about Gandalf.'

'You speak for me also,' he cried, and
turning to Elrond he said: 'The Wise may have good reason to believe that the halfling's trove is
indeed the Great Ring of long debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less.

What is his counsel-if he knows the things that we have
heard?'
'The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond.

What then is this one that he desires so much?
'There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the Mountain, between the loss
and the finding.

'Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass the doors of the
Necromancer in Dol Guldur, and secretly explored his ways, and found thus that our fears were
true: he was none other than Sauron, our Enemy of old, at length taking shape and power again.

Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, and the Council put
forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood and that was in the very year of the finding of
this Ring: a strange chance, if chance it was.

Sauron also had watched us, and had long prepared
against our stroke, governing Mordor from afar through Minas Morgul, where his Nine servants
dwelt, until all was ready.

Into Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled
down the River to the Sea.

But say on!'

'From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,' said Gandalf, 'and I
desired to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how long he had possessed it.

'That was seventeen years ago.

I called for the help of the Dunedain, and
their watch was doubled; and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.'
'And I,' said Aragorn, 'counselled that we should hunt for Gollum, too late though it may
seem.

And since it seemed fit that Isildur's heir should labour to repair Isildur's fault, I went with
Gandalf on the long and hopeless search.'

And then in
my despair I thought again of a test that might make the finding of Gollum unneeded.

What hand save Sauron's ever held this
thing, ere it was lost?

The hand of Isildur alone.
'With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly to Gondor.

Less welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of
old, and grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.
'"If indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient days, and the beginnings of the
City, read on!"

But unless you have more skill even than Saruman, who has studied here long, you will find naught

that is not well known to me, who am master of the lore of this City.

And Boromir, there
lies in Minas Tirith still, unread, I guess, by any save Saruman and myself since the kings failed, a
scroll that Isildur made himself.

'All know in Gondor that he went first to
Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before he committed to
him the rule of the South Kingdom.

'But in that time also he made this scroll,' said Gandalf; 'and that is not remembered in
Gondor, it would seem.

For this scroll concerns the Ring, and thus wrote Isildur therein:
The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but records of it shall
be left in Gondor, where also dwell the heirs of Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these
great matters shall grow dim .

The Ring misseth, maybe, the heat
of Sauron's hand, which was black and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and
maybe were the gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed.

'When I read these words, my quest was ended.

'At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went northwards, messages came to me
out of Lorien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that he had found the creature called Gollum.

Into what deadly perils he had gone alone I
dared not guess.'
'There is little need to tell of them,' said Aragorn.

Lurking
by a stagnant mere, peering in the water as the dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum.

But I learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of the Great

River nigh to the Gladden Fields.

Upon this very
ring which you have here seen held aloft, round and unadorned, the letters that Isildur reported may
still be read, if one has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while.

Out of the
Black Years come the words that the Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been
betrayed:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to bring them all and in the
Darkness bind them.

'Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum.

'He is a small thing, you say, this
Gollum?

To what doom did you put him?'
'He is in prison, but no worse,' said Aragorn.

And I do
not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand.'
'Alas! alas!' cried Legolas, and in his fair elvish face there was great distress.

'The tidings that
I was sent to bring must now be told.

They are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they
may seem to this company.

Smeagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.'
'Escaped?' cried Aragorn.

How
came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?'
'Not through lack of watchfulness,' said Legolas; 'but perhaps through over-kindliness.

Pray do not interrupt, my good Gloin.

Gloin rose and bowed, and Legolas continued.

'In the days of fair weather we led Gollum
through the woods; and there was a high tree standing alone far from the others which he liked to
climb.

When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was
gone, and his guards were slain or taken.

It then seemed plain to us that the attack had been made
for his rescue, and that he knew of it beforehand.

How that was contrived we cannot guess; but
Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy are many.

The dark things that were driven out in
the year of the Dragon's fall have returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil place,
save where our realm is maintained.

'We have failed to recapture Gollum.

We came on his trail among those of many Orcs, and it
plunged deep into the Forest, going south.

But ere long it escaped our skill, and we dared not
continue the hunt; for we were drawing nigh to Dol Guldur, and that is still a very evil place; we do
not go that way.'
'Well, well, he is gone,' said Gandalf. '

'And now I will answer Galdor's other questions.

It is the last chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it has yet
gone.

There messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I
heard of the Black Shadow a chill smote my heart.

But I found nothing save a few fugitives from
the South; yet it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of which they would not speak.

It was Radagast the Brown, who
at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, near the borders of Mirkwood.

"
'"What do you mean?" said I.
'"I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news of a land called Shire.

"And he told me to say that if you feel the need, he
will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it will be too late."
'And that message brought me hope.

It might be that he had found some weapons that

would drive back the Nine.
'"I will go to Saruman," I said.

'"Then you must go now ," said Radagast; "for I have wasted time in looking for you, and the
days are running short.

I was told to find you before Midsummer, and that is now here.

"We shall need your help, and the help of all things that will give it.

Tell them to bring news of
anything that bears on this matter to Saruman and Gandalf.

It
was not made by Saruman, but by the Men of Numenor long ago; and it is very tall and has many
secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft.

It cannot be reached save by passing the circle of
Isengard; and in that circle there is only one gate.

What brings you
now from your lurking-place in the Shire?"
'"The Nine have come forth again," I answered.

"

'"In which case it is no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks a thing to find out what it is
has left the path of wisdom.

"The Elder Days are gone.

But we
must have power, power to order all things as we will, for that good which only the Wise can see.
'"And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper!"

We can bide our time, we can keep
our thoughts in our hearts, deploring maybe evils done by the way, but approving the high and
ultimate purpose: Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain to
accomplish, hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends.

I may find means to persuade you.

There is no descent save by a narrow stair of many thousand
steps, and the valley below seems far away.

I had quite forgotten it.

It came some time ago; after I left the Shire, I
think.'

If I had, I should never
have gone to Isengard, or I should have gone more warily.

He sought me in good faith, and so persuaded me.
'That was the undoing of Saruman's plot.

And the Eagles
of the Mountains went far and wide, and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the
mustering of Orcs; and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands; and they heard news of
the escape of Gollum.

And they sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me.

He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose
one much to my liking, but little to his.

'Then he must be a noble beast indeed,' said Aragorn; 'and it grieves me more than many

tidings that might seem worse to learn that Sauron levies such tribute.

I know the
Men of Rohan; true and valiant, our allies, dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.'

'The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,' answered Aragorn. '

Who knows what you will find there, if ever you return?'
'Not this at least,' said Boromir, 'that they will buy their lives with horses.

I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I had words with old Gamgee.

So
overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of him, when he stopped quaking, that I embraced the old
fellow.

How it happened I could not then guess, but I learned that you had been in Bree the night
before, and had gone off that morning with Strider.
'"Strider!"

"He got at them, in spite of all
that I could do, and they took up with him.

"It's the best news I have had since
midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at the least.

"Now I can take a night's rest, the first since I have
forgotten when.

I got up before dawn and went after
them.

It was
impossible to find you, Frodo, in the wilderness, and it would have been folly to try with all the
Nine at my heels.

So I had to trust to Aragorn.

But I hoped to draw some of them off, and yet reach
Rivendell ahead of you and send out help.

That helped a little, for there were only five, not nine,
when your camp was attacked.

It is perilous to study too deeply the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill.

I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo here; and it seems to me that
he is perhaps not so alone and singular as I had thought him.

Time was when a squirrel could go
from tree to tree from what is now the Shire to Dunland west of Isengard.

But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed this is still
the same that walked the woods and hills long ago, and even then was older than the old.

'Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help?' asked Erestor.

'But in any case,' said Glorfindel, 'to send the Ring to him would only postpone the day of
evil.

I think that in
the end, if all else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then Night will come.'
'I know little of Iarwain save the name,' said Galdor; 'but Glorfindel, I think, is right.

'Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by strength' said Glorfindel, 'two things
only remain for us to attempt: to send it over the Sea, or to destroy it.'
'But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craft that we here possess,'
said Elrond.

'And they who dwell beyond the Sea would not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to
Middle-earth; it is for us who still dwell here to deal with it.'
'Then, said Glorfindel, 'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the lies of Saruman come
true.

We should seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not hope
to make one.'
'And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,' said Galdor.

The Nine have been unhorsed indeed but that is but a respite, ere they find new steeds and swifter.

Only the waning might of Gondor stands now between him and a march in power along the coasts
into the North; and if he comes, assailing the White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves
may have no escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.'

Gondor wanes, you say.

But Gondor
stands, and even the end of its strength is still very strong.'
'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,' said Galdor.

'And other roads he may
find that Gondor does not guard.

'
'Then,' said Erestor, 'there are but two courses, as Glorfindel already has declared: to hide the
Ring for ever; or to unmake it.

'The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never submit; but they may be beaten down.

Take it and go forth to victory!'
'Alas, no,' said Elrond.

Its strength, Boromir, is too
great for anyone to wield at will, save only those who have already a great power of their own.

'Then in Gondor
we must trust to such weapons as we have.

Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide – if the hand that
wields it has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.'
'Who can tell?' said Aragorn.

Anduin the Great flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath
and the Gates of Gondor.'
'Still it might be well for all,' said Gloin the Dwarf, 'if all these strengths were joined, and the
powers of each were used in league.

Indeed I may now reveal that it was
partly in hope to find that ring that Balin went away.'
'Balin will find no ring in Moria,' said Gandalf.

Yet they too were made by the Dark Lord long ago.

But they were not made as weapons of war
or conquest: that is not their power.

But maybe when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair
things will fade and be forgotten.

That is my belief.'

'Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel, 'if by it the power of
Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be taken away for ever.'

What strength have we for the finding of the Fire in which it was made?

This quest may be attempted by the weak with as
much hope as the strong.

It is a good ending, and none the worse for having been used before.

As all your
unpleasant advice has been good, I wonder if this advice is not bad.

'If I understand aright all that I have heard,' he said, 'I think that this task is
appointed for you, Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no one will.

'You at least shall go with him.

Chapter 3
The Ring Goes South
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room.

'Instead of throwing him out, and clapping him in chains, Elrond
goes and rewards him for his cheek!'
'Rewards!' said Frodo.

You are not thinking what
you are saying: condemned to go on this hopeless journey, a reward?

Yesterday I dreamed that my
task was done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.'

If you
have to go, then it will be a punishment for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell.

We want to go on.'
'That's what I meant,' said Pippin.

I shall go,
unless they chain me up.

I think Legolas's bit of news about Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed
it off.'
'You were wrong,' said Gandalf. 'You were inattentive.

More will go tomorrow.

And Aragorn has gone with Elrond's sons.

'We'll just wait long enough for winter to come.'
'That can't be helped,' said Bilbo.

A funny way of honouring it, I can't help thinking.

But there it is: you can't wait now till spring; and you can't go
till the reports come back.

We hope that they were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so
made for a while less dangerous; but we must find out for certain.

I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will whisper
this in your ears.

I must be off.'
'How long do you think I shall have here?' said Frodo to Bilbo when Gandalf had gone.

We can have many a good talk.

What about helping me with my book, and making a start on the
next?

'Books ought to have good endings.

The future, good or ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have any power over the
present.

Health and hope grew strong in them, and they were content with each good day as it came,
taking pleasure in every meal, and in every word and song.

But autumn was waning fast; slowly the golden light faded to pale silver, and the
lingering leaves fell from the naked trees.

The hobbits had been nearly two months in the House of Elrond, and November had gone by
with the last shreds of autumn, and December was passing, when the scouts began to return.

Some
had gone north beyond the springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors; and others had gone west,
and with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the Greyflood, as far
as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by a ruined town.

Many had gone east and
south; and some of these had crossed the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had
climbed the pass at the source of the Gladden River, and had come down into Wilderland and over
the Gladden Fields and so at length had reached the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel.

The sons
of Elrond, Elladan and Elrohir, were the last to return; they had made a great journey, passing down

the Silverlode into a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak to any save to Elrond.

Nothing had been seen or heard of Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were
hunting again far up the Great River.

On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers discovered the bodies of five more,
and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered.

And if we are careful that will be hard to find.

'If the Ring is to set out, it must go soon.

But those who go with it must not count on their
errand being aided by war or force.

'I will go with Sam.'
'Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond.

You will meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and you may find friends
upon your way when you least look for it.

'And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far as they will or fortune allows.

Had I a host of Elves in armour of the
Elder Days, it would avail little, save to arouse the power of Mordor.

With you and your faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great
task, and maybe the end of his labours.

Legolas shall be for the Elves; and Gimli son of Gloin for the Dwarves.

They are willing to go
at least to the passes of the Mountains, and maybe beyond.

For men you shall have Aragorn son of
Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.'
'Strider!' said Frodo.

'I ask leave once again to be your companion, Frodo.'
'I would have begged you to come,' said Frodo, 'only I thought you were going to Minas Tirith
with Boromir.'
'I am,' said Aragorn.

Of my household I
may find some that it seems good to me to send.'

We want to go with Frodo.'
'That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what lies ahead,' said Elrond.

It is true that if these hobbits understood the danger, they would not dare to go.

But they
would still wish to go, or wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhappy.

Even if you

chose for us an elf-lord, such as Glorfindel, he could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road
to the Fire by the power that is in him.'
'You speak gravely,' said Elrond, 'but I am in doubt.

My heart is against his going.'
'Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send me home tied in a sack,'
said Pippin. '

You shall go,' said Elrond, and he sighed.

The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade was traced a device
of seven stars set between the crescent Moon and the rayed Sun, and about them was written many
runes; for Aragorn son of Arathorn was going to war upon the marches of Mordor.

And Aragorn gave it a new name and called it
Anduril, Flame of the West.

Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road and the perils they would
meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps and books of lore that were in the house of
Elrond.

I took it to keep it safe but I've
forgotten to ask if the smiths could mend it.

'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to be rather heavy for its
size.

I got it back from Michel Delving before I started, and packed it with my
luggage: I brought all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the Ring.

Good luck to you!'

All I ask in return is: take as much care of yourself as you can, and bring back all the
news you can, and any old songs and tales you can come by.

Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.

I sit beside the fire and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.

Even of the sky above you must
beware as you go on your way.'

Aragorn had
Anduril but no other weapon, and he went forth clad only in rusty green and brown.

Boromir had a long sword, in fashion like Anduril but of less lineage and he bore
also a shield and his war-horn.

'Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,' he said, 'and then let all the foes of
Gondor flee!'

'But always I have let my horn cry at setting forth, and though
thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth as a thief in the night.'

Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a
long white knife.

The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on him: he was glossy and
seemed to have the vigour of youth.

He gave
me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it: if you don't let me go with you, Sam, I'll follow on
my own.'

So Bill was going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company
that did not seem depressed.

Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully what
this hour meant to him.

Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in his mind all the things that
he had stowed in it, wondering if he had forgotten anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear;
and the little box of salt that he always carried and refilled when he could; a good supply of
pipe-weed (but not near enough, I'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small
belongings of his master's that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in
triumph when they were called for.

You'll want it, if you haven't got it."

'The Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom.

On
him alone is any charge laid: neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the
Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Company and the Council, and only
then in gravest need.

The others go with him as free companions, to help him on his way.

The further you go, the less
easy will it be to withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you will.

But go now with good hearts!

Farewell, and
may the blessing of Elves and Men and all Free Folk go with you.

'Good... good luck!' cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold.

Many others of Elrond's household stood in the shadows and watched them go, bidding them
farewell with soft voices.

The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green vale of the Great
River in Wilderland on the other side of the range, and their going would be slow; but they hoped in
this way to escape the notice of unfriendly eyes.

Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this land even in the dark.

The others were in file behind, and Legolas whose eyes were keen was the rearguard.

The first part
of their journey was hard and dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind.

For many
sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed able to keep
out its searching fingers.

In the evening they went on again, always as nearly southward as they
could find a way.

'I need no map,' said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and was gazing out before him
with a strange light in his deep eyes.

My
heart trembles at the thought that I may see them soon.'
'May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf!'

We must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to
the Great River, and then –'
He paused.
'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry.

'That is true,' said Legolas.

'But the Elves of this land were of a race strange to us of the silvan
folk, and the trees and the grass do not now remember them; only I hear the stones lament them:
deep they delved us, fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are gone .

They are gone.

They sought the Havens long ago.'
That morning they lit a fire in a deep hollow shrouded by great bushes of holly, and their
supper-breakfast was merrier than it had been since they set out.

They did not hurry to bed
afterwards, for they expected to have all the night to sleep in, and they did not mean to go on again
until the evening of the next day.

Only Aragorn was silent and restless.

'Is
there more in it than surprise at seeing four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are

so seldom seen or heard?'
'I hope that is it,' answered Aragorn. '

'If you bring a Ranger with you, it is well to
pay attention to him, especially if the Ranger is Aragorn.

It was Sam's turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined him.

It don't look like a cloud,' said Sam in a whisper to Aragorn.

Flocks of birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all
the land as if they were searching for something; and they were steadily drawing nearer.

hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade of a holly-bush; for a
whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from the main host, and came, flying low,
straight towards the ridge.

Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the sky was again clear
would Aragorn rise.

They are not natives here; they are crebain
out of Fangorn and Dunland.

As for moving as soon as it is
dark, I am afraid that you are right.'
'Luckily our fire made little smoke, and had burned low before the crebain came,' said
Aragorn.

I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.'
'Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. 'There may be many unexpected feasts
ahead for you.

'But I'm beginning to think it's time
we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain and saw the end of the Road, so to speak.

Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path.

'It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, 'and not with the wind.'

The wind had gone now round to the
north-east.

'Winter deepens behind us,' he said quietly to Aragorn.

What do you think of your
course now, Aragorn?'

Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn were continuing
some debate that had begun long before.

'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, Gandalf,' answered
Aragorn.

'And perils known and unknown will grow as we go on.

But we must go on; and it is no
good our delaying the passage of the mountains.

Say nothing to the others I beg, not until it is plain
that there is no other way.'
'We must decide before we go further,' answered Gandalf.
'Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest and sleep,' said Aragorn.

In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn
went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras.

Frodo watched them, wondering which way the debate would go.

He could not guess what was the other dark and secret
way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it
had been abandoned.
'From signs that we have seen lately,' said Gandalf, 'I fear that the Redhorn Gate may be
watched; and also I have doubts of the weather that is coming up behind.

We must
go with all the speed that we can.

It will not help us to keep so secret that we are
frozen to death.

When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should
carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.'
'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't you lad?' said Sam.

The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their way became steep and
difficult.

The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly
be seen.

I wish this lot would go off to Hobbiton!

No living hobbit (save Bilbo) could remember the
Fell Winter of 1311, when the white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen Brandywine.

'What do you say now, Aragorn?'
'That I feared it too,' Aragorn answered, 'but less than other things.

I knew the risk of snow,
though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save high up in the mountains.

"They say in my land that he
can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor.

But they had not gone more than a furlong when the storm returned with

fresh fury.

Soon even Boromir found it
hard to keep going.

The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was
plain that they could not go much further, if the snow continued.

'We cannot go further tonight,' said Boromir. '

'I do call it the wind,' said Aragorn.

There are
many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have little love for those that go on two legs, and
yet are not in league with Sauron, but have purposes of their own.

Some have been in this world
longer than he.'
'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, 'long years ago, when
rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.'

'Either stop where we are, or go back,' said Gandalf. '

It is no good going on.

We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones – or anything
else.'
'And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn.

'It is useless to sit here until
the snow goes over our heads.

We must do something to save ourselves.'
'Give them this,' said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a leathern flask.

The others also revived and found fresh hope and
vigour.

Doubtless we shall be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has
covered us, but that will not help us.'
'You may make a fire, if you can,' answered Gandalf. '

Picking up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and then with a word of command, naur an
edraith ammen!

The fire burned low, and the last faggot
was thrown on.
'The night is getting old,' said Aragorn.

He has more
snow yet to fling at us, if we go on.

The sooner we go back and down the better.'

'If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a path for you,' said
Legolas.

'If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save us,' answered Gandalf.

It is no more than a furlong off, I
guess.'
'Then let us force a path thither, you and I!' said Aragorn.

Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little less in height, was broader and
heavier in build.

He led the way, and Aragorn followed him.

Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and then he turned to the others.

I go to find the Sun!'

The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragorn dwindled into black
specks in the whiteness.

An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at last they saw Legolas
coming back.

At the same time Boromir and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far behind him and
came labouring up the slope.
'Well,' cried Legolas as he ran up, 'I have not brought the Sun.

But I
have brought back a gleam of good hope for those who are doomed to go on feet.

'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you,' said Boromir, who
came up at that moment.

'I am weary, but I still have some strength left, and Aragorn too.

Aragorn with Merry came behind.

On the
far side Merry and Pippin were set down, and there they waited with Legolas for the rest of the
Company to arrive.

Last came Aragorn
carrying Frodo.

As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became steadily more shallow as they went

down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along.

'The birds again!' said Aragorn, pointing down.

'That cannot be helped now,' said Gandalf.

'Whether they are good or evil, or have nothing to
do with us at all, we must go down at once.

'We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,' he said.

'The attack on the Redhorn Gate has tired
us out, and we must rest here for a while.'
'And then where are we to go?' asked Frodo.

'We have no choice
but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.'

But Aragorn and Boromir made no sign.

'But how can I return without shame – unless there is indeed
no other way, and we are already defeated?'
'You are right, Frodo,' said Gandalf, 'to go back is to admit defeat and face worse defeat to
come.

If we go back now, then the Ring must remain there: we shall not be able to set out again.

'Then we must go on, if there is a way,' said Frodo with a sigh.

Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least been
tried.'

said
Aragorn darkly.

Nor do I see the need to go there.

Or we might pass by and

cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the
sea.'
'Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf. '

The Gap of Rohan is closed to
us while we go with the Bearer.

The danger will increase with
every league that we go south under the naked sky.

Therefore I
advise that we should go neither over the mountains, nor round them, but under them.

'I will go and look on the halls of Durin,
whatever may wait there – if you can find the doors that are shut.'

'Good, Gimli!' said Gandalf.

I passed through, and I came out again alive!'
'I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though I also came out again,
the memory is very evil.

But the question is: who will follow me, if I lead
you there?'
'I will,' said Gimli eagerly.

'I will,' said Aragorn heavily.

And I say to you: if
you pass the doors of Moria, beware!'
'I will not go,' said Boromir; 'not unless the vote of the whole company is against me.

What
do Legolas and the little folk say?

The Ring-bearer's voice surely should be heard?'
'I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas.

'I do not wish to go,' he
said; 'but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of Gandalf.

Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet.

said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath.

'I am no good after all.

Legolas had loosed his bow.

Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs had
fled.

Through the throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his
sword with a thrust; with a great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another.

The bow of Legolas was singing.

The last arrow of Legolas kindled in the air
as it flew, and plunged burning into the heart of a great wolf-chieftain.

No trace of the fight remained but the charred trees and
the arrows of Legolas lying on the hill-top.

All were undamaged save one of which only the point
was left.

Let us eat quickly and go!'
That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command of some power that
had no longer any use for snow, since they had retreated from the pass, a power that wished now to
have a clear light in which things that moved in the wild could be seen from far away.

It is not far, but our path may be winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked
in this country, and only once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago.

Let us go!'
'I do not know which to hope,' said Boromir grimly: 'that Gandalf will find what he seeks, or
that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost for ever.

But either Gandalf was astray, or else the land had changed in recent years; for he
did not strike the stream where he looked to find it, only a few miles southwards from their start.

They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky;
but what the night would bring, if it caught them in that lost land, none of them cared to think.

The sun turned from the noon and began to go west.

Let us go and see what things are like now!'

When they reached the top they saw that they could go no further that way, and
the reason for the drying up of the Gate-stream was revealed.

Behind them the sinking Sun filled the
cool western sky with glimmering gold.

It has an unwholesome look.'
'We must find a way round the northern edge,' said Gimli.

Poor Bill has been a useful companion and it goes to my heart to
turn him adrift now.

They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or
two to go before they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was making for; and then
he had still to find the doors.

'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,' said Legolas.

But I beg you two,
Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends, and to help me.

The doors are shut and
hidden, and the sooner we find them the better.

Turning to the others he said: 'While I am searching, will you each make ready to enter the
Mines?

For here I fear we must say farewell to our good beast of burden.

You will have to choose between Bill and your
master.'
'He'd follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon's den, if I led him,' protested Sam. '

'Go with words of guard and guiding on you,' he said.

Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so
come in time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go.
'There, Sam!

Bill, seeming to understand well
what was going on, nuzzled up to him, putting his nose to Sam's ear.

The others
sorted out the goods, making a pile of all that could be left behind, and dividing up the rest.

Legolas
was pressed against the rock, as if listening.
'Well, here we are and all ready,' said Merry, 'but where are the Doors?

'They are invisible, and their
own masters cannot find them or open them, if their secret is forgotten.'
'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' said Gandalf, coming
suddenly to life and turning round.

At first they were no more than pale gossamer-threads,
so fine that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon caught them, but steadily they grew broader
and clearer, until their design could be guessed.

'And there is the Tree of the High Elves!' said Legolas.

'They are wrought of ithildin that
mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now
long forgotten in Middle-earth.

'If you are a friend, speak the password, and the doors will
open, and you can enter.'
'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'these doors are probably governed by words.

The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf well, remained silent and
unmoved.

'Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?'

How
could that be, if you did not know how to enter?'
'The answer to your first question, Boromir,' said the wizard, 'is that I do not know the word –
yet.

As for your other question: do
you doubt my tale?

From the outside nothing will move them save the spell of
command.

'What are you going to do then?'

But if that does not shatter
them, and I am allowed a little peace from foolish questions, I will seek for the opening words.

I can still remember ten score of them without searching in my mind.

Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!

'It seems that we shall need him still, if the wolves
do not find us.

Now let us go!'

The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help.

They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff against the doors.

And thither we are going against my
wish.

'Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing, since we can't find a
dining-room!' said Frodo.

Go
carefully with the water, too!

We may not have a chance of filling our skins and bottles till we come down into Dimrill
Dale.'
'How long is that going to take us?' asked Frodo.

But going straight, without
mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or four marches, I expect.

All were eager to get the journey over
as quickly as possible, and were willing, tired as they were, to go on marching still for several
hours.

Behind Frodo went
Sam, and after him Legolas, and the young hobbits, and Boromir.

In the dark at the rear, grim and
silent, walked Aragorn.

To Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before were now
of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished
to go, and he did not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal.

said Aragorn.

He will not go astray – if there is any path to find.

He is
surer of finding the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Beruthiel.'

'I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it!'

One sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could see more in the dark than
any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf.

There was no
sound but the sound of their own feet; the dull stump of Gimli's dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of
Boromir; the light step of Legolas; the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the
slow firm footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride.

They had been going for several hours
with only brief halts, when Gandalf came to his first serious check.

He
held up his staff in the hope of finding some marks or inscription that might help his choice; but
nothing of the kind was to be seen.

I hope those wolves haven't got him yet.'

Steady!' cried Gandalf as Merry and Pippin pushed forward, glad to find a place
where they could rest with at least more feeling of shelter than in the open passage.

I will go first.'

'One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you were going to strike the
bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry.

'Let the guide go first while you have one.'
'This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the three passages,' said
Gimli.

You, Pippin,
can go on the first watch, as a reward,' he growled, as he rolled himself in a blanket.

He wished he could cover the hole, if only
with a blanket, but he dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep.

But we are high up, a
good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken.

But in the meanwhile we had
better go no further.

Things have gone well so far, and the greater part of the
dark road is over.

The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:

A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver floor,
And runes of power upon the door.

Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about
here still?'
Gimli was silent.

The wealth of Moria was not in gold and jewels, the toys of
the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant.

Its worth was ten times that of gold,
and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground, and even the Orcs dare not delve here for
it.

He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into the dark, until he was relieved

by Legolas.

'Good morning!' said Gandalf: 'For morning it is again at last.

Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates
and see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.'
'I shall be glad,' said Gimli.

After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once.

Unless I am quite astray,
I guess that we are above and to the north of the Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the
right road down to them.

Let us go towards that light in the north
door.

If we could find a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes only down deep
shafts.'

Frodo thought of Bilbo and
his long friendship with the dwarf, and of Balin's visit to the Shire long ago.

In that dusty chamber
in the mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world.

At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for anything that would give them
tidings of Balin's fate, or show what had become of his folk.

'I
guess that it began with their coming to Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the pages seem to
have numbers referring to the years after their arrival.

'I guess that is where we now stand.'
'Well, I can read no more for a long way,' said Gandalf, 'except the word gold , and Durin's
Axe and something helm .

mithril ; and the last two lines Oin to seek for the upper armouries of

Third Deep , something go westwards , a blur, to Hollin gate .'

Then there
are four lines smeared so that I can only read went 5 days ago .

Come, let us go!

The morning is
passing.'
'Which way shall we go?'

Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and
bear right and south, and go downwards.

cried Legolas.

'Slam the doors and wedge them!' shouted Aragorn.

We will go that way, if
we get a chance.'

'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing by the eastern door
listening.

But it is no good flying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind.

Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it opens inwards.

'One for the Shire!' cried Aragorn.

You have a good blade, Frodo
son of Drogo!'

Legolas shot two through the throat.

Boromir and Aragorn slew many.

A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his orc: a sturdy
thrust with his Barrow-blade.

Let us go, before the troll returns!'

Diving under
Aragorn's blow with the speed of a striking snake he charged into the Company and thrust with his
spear straight at Frodo.

His followers fled
howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them.

Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for the stair, pushing Merry and
Pippin in front of him.

The others followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas: in spite
of the peril he lingered by Balin's tomb with his head bowed.

Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement.

Off you go, all of you, down the stairs!

Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on!

Go quickly and choose
paths leading right and downwards.'
'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone!'

said Aragorn.

Go!'

Go on!

Go on!

Go on!

Gandalf took no turns, right or left, for the passage
seemed to be going in the direction that he desired.

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and had descended many
flights of stairs.

Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step.

I feared that it was a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn
was carrying.'

'Well,' said Aragorn, 'I can only say that hobbits are made of a stuff so tough that I have never
met the like of it.

There is more about you than meets the eye, as I said of
him long ago.'

Still, we can only go on.'

Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it was a long shot for his small bow.

What it was could not be seen: it was like a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form,
of man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to be in it and to go before it.

ai!' wailed Legolas.

Aragorn and Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their
ground, side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge.

Go back to the Shadow!

cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the bridge.

'I am with you, Gandalf!'
'Gondor!' cried Boromir and leaped after him.

he cried, and was gone.

Even as Aragorn and Boromir came flying back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell.

With a cry Aragorn roused them.

Aragorn leading, Boromir at the
rear.

Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that
stood in his path, and the rest fled in terror of his wrath.

The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light on the land.

I fear we cannot stay here longer,' said Aragorn.

'Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,' said Aragorn, pointing to the falls.

But still it could be
seen that once long ago a great paved way had wound upwards from the lowlands of the

Dwarf-kingdom.

said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.

'I would not have you go
without seeing Kheled-zaram.'

'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!'

'Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other mountain-streams,' said
Aragorn.

They looked as he pointed, and before them they could see the stream leaping down to the
trough of the valley, and then running on and away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden
haze.
'There lie the woods of Lothlorien!' said Legolas.

For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn
to gold.

Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they fall, and then the boughs are
laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars
are of silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey.

My
heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime!'
'My heart will be glad, even in the winter,' said Aragorn.

For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the others; but Aragorn was leading
them at a great pace, and after a while they lagged behind.

At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he spoke to Aragorn.

The others
halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come with him.

'So much has happened this day and we have
such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were hurt; and Sam too.

While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush– and fir-wood, and drew
water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo.

Sam's wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, and
Aragorn's face was grave as he examined it.

'Good luck, Sam!' he said.

'All I needed was some
food and a little rest.'
'No!' said Aragorn.

Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was steeped.

Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.

Do not lay it aside, even in sleep, unless fortune brings you where
you are safe for a while; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.'

When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on.

They had not gone far before the sun
sank behind the westward heights and great shadows crept down the mountain-sides.

Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly refreshed were able
to go at a fair pace, and with only one brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three more
hours.

'There are no goblins near, or my ears are made of wood.

Before them a wide grey shadow
loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of leaves like poplars in the breeze.
'Lothlorien!' cried Legolas.

We have come to the eaves of the Golden Wood.

In the dim light of the stars their stems were grey, and
their quivering leaves a hint of fallow gold.
'Lothlorien!'

said Aragorn.

We are still little
more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can go no further.

'It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land whence we wandered in
ages long ago,' said Legolas, 'but we hear that Lorien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power
here that holds evil from the land.

Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they dwell now
deep in the woods and far from the northern border.'
'Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,' said Aragorn, and sighed as if some memory stirred in
him.

We will go forward a short way, until the trees are all
about us, and then we will turn aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.'

'What other fairer way would you desire?' said Aragorn.

And now we must enter the Golden Wood, you say.

But of that perilous land we
have heard in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few none have
escaped unscathed.'
'Say not unscathed , but if you say unchanged , then maybe you will speak the truth,' said
Aragorn.

'But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of those who once were wise they now
speak evil of Lothlorien.

Believe what you will, there is no other way for us – unless you would go
back to Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or swim the Great River all alone.'
'Then lead on!' said Boromir.

'Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and perilous; but only evil need fear it, or those who
bring some evil with them.

They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they came upon another stream
flowing down swiftly from the tree-clad slopes that climbed back westward towards the mountains.

'Here is Nimrodel!' said Legolas.

'Of this stream the Silvan Elves made many songs long ago,
and still we sing them in the North, remembering the rainbow on its falls, and the golden flowers
that floated in its foam.

On the further bank we can
rest, and the sound of the falling water may bring us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.'

One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas.

When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little food; and Legolas told
them tales of Lothlorien that the Elves of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sunlight and
starlight upon the meadows by the Great River before the world was grey.

'Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel?' asked Legolas.

'I will sing you a song of the maiden
Nimrodel, who bore the same name as the stream beside which she lived long ago.

In a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them he began:
An Elven-maid there was of old,
A shining star by day:
Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,
Her shoes of silver-grey.

As sun upon the golden boughs
In Lorien the fair.

Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothlorien.

The wind was in his flowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.

The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased.

'That is
but a part, for I have forgotten much.

'I said not so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly.

'Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,' said Aragorn.

'I will climb up,' said Legolas.

'I am at home among trees, by root or bough, though these trees
are of a kind strange to me, save as a name in song.

I cannot sleep on a perch!'
'Then dig a hole in the ground,' said Legolas, 'if that is more after the fashion of your kind.

it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to earth in surprise and fear.

Legolas looked up and
answered in the same language.8
'Who are they, and what do they say?' asked Merry.

'They're Elves,' said Sam. 'Can't you hear their voices?'
'Yes, they are Elves,' said Legolas, 'and they say that you breathe so loud that they could shoot
you in the dark.'

Legolas ran
lightly up, and Frodo followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly.

When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated with three other Elves.

But there are
some of us still who go abroad for the gathering of news and the watching of our enemies, and they
speak the languages of other lands.

How many are you?'
'Eight,' said Legolas.

'Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, Aragorn, is an
Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.'
'The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lorien,' said Haldir, 'and he has the favour
of the Lady.

'The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas.

The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned Legolas in their own tongue.

'Very
good,' said Haldir at last.

If Aragorn and Legolas
will guard him, and answer for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlorien.

We have been
keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a great troop of Orcs going north toward Moria,
along the skirts of the mountains, many days ago.

Tomorrow early you must go on.

You, Legolas, must answer to us for
them.

And have an eye on that dwarf!'
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon afterwards Merry
and Pippin clambered up on to the high flet.

Then they wrapped
themselves warmly, not only in the fur-cloaks of the Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and
tried to go to sleep.

'I hope, if I do go to sleep in this bed-loft, that I shan't roll
off,' he said.

'Once I do get to sleep,' said Sam, 'i shall go on sleeping, whether I roll off or no.

The other had gone down to take up his watch on one of the lower branches.

At last

lulled by the wind in the boughs above, and the sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below,
Frodo fell asleep with the song of Legolas running in his mind.

The Elves were gone.

The sounds died
slowly away, and seemed to go southward, on into the wood.

But the Elf had gone.

He got up and crawled to
the opening and peered down.

They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the
ground for a while near the place where you halted.

'Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn our people.

Looking through an opening on the south side of
the flet Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea of fallow gold tossing gently in the
breeze.

'Farewell, sweet Nimrodel!' cried Legolas.

He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out of a thicket of young trees an Elf stepped, clad
in grey, but with his hood thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun.

'I can walk this path,' said Legolas; 'but the others have not this skill.

'Now, friends,' said Haldir, 'you have entered the Naith of Lorien or the Gore, as you would
say, for it is the land that lies like a spear-head between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the
Great.

I am
no more likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.'

'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will go back and seek my own land, where I am known to
be true of word, though I perish alone in the wilderness.'
'You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly.

A plague on
Dwarves and their stiff necks!' said Legolas.

'Come!' said Aragorn.

We will all be blindfold, even Legolas.

But I will be content, if only Legolas here shares my

blindness.'

'I am an Elf and a kinsman here,' said Legolas, becoming angry in his turn.

'Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn.

'I shall lead you well, and the paths are smooth and
straight.'
'Alas for the folly of these days!' said Legolas.

'Here all are enemies of the one Enemy, and
yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry in the woodland under leaves of gold!'
'Folly it may seem,' said Haldir.

Yet so little faith and
trust do we find now in the world beyond Lothlorien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not
by our own trust endanger our land.

Even if we could come to the shores of the
Sea, we should find no longer any shelter there.

It
had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowing whether it was good or ill, and it had
vanished down the Silverlode southward.

'Also,' said Haldir, 'they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim.

Upon it, as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the outer
had bark of snowy white, and were leafless but beautiful in their shapely nakedness; the inner were
mallorn-trees of great height, still arrayed in pale gold.

At the feet of the trees, and all about the
green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden flowers shaped like stars.

'For this is the heart of the ancient
realm as it was long ago, and here is the mound of Amroth, where in happier days his high house
was built.

He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and
white and blue and green, but they were fresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment first
perceived them and made for them names new and wonderful.

When he had gone and passed again into the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer from the Shire
would walk there, upon the grass among elanor and niphredil in fair Lothlorien.

Frodo stood still, hearing far off great seas upon beaches
that had long ago been washed away, and sea-birds crying whose race had perished from the earth.

Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high flet.

At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as a tree; but in his hand was a
small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in his eyes.

For the grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in white, a
young lord tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodo could not see.

Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass
upon its brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory of the sun that had gone.

In their many-tiered branches and amid their ever-moving leaves
countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and silver.

We must go round to the southern side, and the way is not short, for the city is great.'

'I will go first,' said Haldir. '

Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas.

The chamber was filled with a soft light; its walls were green and silver and its roof of gold.

They were clad wholly in white; and
the hair of the Lady was of deep gold, and the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and
bright; but no sign of age was upon them, unless it were in the depths of their eyes; for these were
keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the wells of deep memory.

'Welcome Aragorn
son of Arathorn!'

But the end is near, for good or ill.

But I cannot see him from afar, unless he comes within the fences of
Lothlorien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are hidden from me.'
'Alas!' said Aragorn.

'We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,' said Legolas.

'At first we were
weary and danger was too close behind and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we
walked in gladness on the fair paths of Lorien.'
'Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,' said Frodo.

'Gandalf was our guide, and
he led us through Moria; and when our escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.'
'Tell us now the full tale!' said Celeborn.

Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of Caradhras, and in the days
that followed; and he spoke of Balin and his book, and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and
the fire, and the narrow bridge, and the coming of the Terror. '

An evil of the Ancient World it
seemed, such as I have never seen before,' said Aragorn.

'It was both a shadow and a flame, strong
and terrible.'
'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; 'of all elf-banes the most deadly, save the One who
sits in the Dark Tower.'
'Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams – I saw Durin's Bane,'

said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes.
'Alas!' said Celeborn.

And if it were possible, one would say that at
the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net of Moria.'
'He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely.

If our folk had been exiled long and far from Lothlorien, who of the
Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish to look upon their ancient
home, though it had become an abode of dragons?

I will do what I
can to aid you, each according to his wish and need, but especially that one of the little folk who
bears the burden.'
'Your quest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo.

He has dwelt in the West
since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond
or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together through ages of the world we have fought the
long defeat.

And if my designs had not gone amiss, it
would have been governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then mayhap things would have gone
otherwise.

But this I will say to you: your
Quest stands upon the edge of a knife.

And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked searchingly at each of
them in turn.

None save Legolas and Aragorn could long endure her glance.

Then they sighed and felt suddenly
weary, as those who have been questioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken
openly.

'Go now!'

Even if your Quest did not
concern us closely, you should have refuge in this City, until you were healed and refreshed.

'If you want to know, I felt
as if I hadn't got nothing on, and I didn't like it.

All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was offered a choice between a
shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and something that he greatly desired: clear before his mind it
lay, and to get it he had only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest and the war against
Sauron to others.

'Maybe it was only a test, and she
thought to read our thoughts for her own good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was
tempting us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give.

And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him with questions.

'I do not feel too sure of this Elvish Lady and her purposes.'
'Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!' said Aragorn sternly.

There is in her and in this land no evil, unless a man bring it hither himself.

All the while
that they dwelt there the sun shone clear, save for a gentle rain that fell at times, and passed away
leaving all things fresh and clean.

Haldir had bidden them farewell and gone
back again to the fences of the North, where great watch was now kept since the tidings of Moria
that the Company had brought.

Legolas was away much among the Galadhrim, and after the first
night he did not sleep with the other companions, though he returned to eat and talk with them.

But
if Legolas was with the Company, he would not interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not
the skill, and that for him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song.

From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.

'But that is the best I can do yet.'
'Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you'll say a word about his fireworks,'
said Sam. 'Something like this:
The finest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of flowers.

I
can't bear to think of bringing the news to him.'

'I asked you the same question once before –
it seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more of them since then.'
'I have indeed!' said Sam. '

Nothing seems to be going on, and nobody seems to want it to.

And don't think I'm finding fault.

All the same,
I'm beginning to feel that if we've got to go on, then we'd best get it over.

And I
don't reckon that these folk can do much more to help us, magic or no.

'I'll have a peep, Lady, if you're
willing.'

'And I'd not mind a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in an aside to Frodo.

Then he seemed to see himself going along a dim passage, and
climbing an endless winding stair.

But this time they were not so close, and he could see what was going on: they
were not waving in the wind, they were falling, crashing to the ground.
'Hi!'

'I must go home.

They've dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the poor old gaffer going
down the Hill with his bits of things on a barrow.

I must go home!'
'You cannot go home alone,' said the Lady.

'You did not wish to go home without your master
before you looked in the Mirror, and yet you knew that evil things might well be happening in the
Shire.

No, I'll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,' he said.

If what I've seen turns out true, somebody's going to catch it hot!'
'Do you now wish to look, Frodo?' said the Lady Galadriel.

Seeing is both good and perilous.

Doubt came into Frodo's mind:
was this a vision of Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it Saruman?

Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew with certainty and
horror that among the many things that it sought he himself was one.

Its rays glanced
upon a ring about her finger; it glittered like polished gold overlaid with silver light, and a white
stone in it twinkled as if the Even-star had come down to rest upon her hand.

We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget
and to be forgotten.'

The evil that was devised long
ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron himself stands or falls.

'I will diminish, and go into the West and remain Galadriel.'

'In the morning you must depart for now we have chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.'
'I would ask one thing before we go,' said Frodo, 'a thing which I often meant to ask Gandalf
in Rivendell.

Let us go!'

Chapter 8
Farewell to Lorien
That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, and there the Lord
and Lady greeted them with fair words.

'Now is the time,' he said, 'when those who wish to continue the Quest must harden their
hearts to leave this land.

Those who no longer wish to go forward may remain here, for a while.

But
whether they stay or go, none can be sure of peace.

Then they may return to their own lands, or else go
to the long home of those that fall in battle.'

'They all resolved to go forward,' said Galadriel looking in their eyes.

'As for me,' said Boromir, 'my way home lies onward and not back.'
'That is true,' said Celeborn, 'but is all this Company going with you to Minas Tirith?'
'We have not decided our course,' said Aragorn.

As some of you know well, it cannot be crossed by travellers with baggage between Lorien
and Gondor, save by boat.

The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this side, upon the west;
but the straight road of the Quest lies east of the River, upon the darker shore.

The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked
doubtful and troubled.

'It is not my part to choose for you;
but I will help you as I may.

There are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk
know the swift Forest River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.'
'And one Hobbit!'

They must be
small and light, for if you go far by water, there are places where you will be forced to carry them.

Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times.

'I will send my people to you in the morning to help you make ready for the journey.

'Good night, my friends!' said Galadriel.

Good night!'

Legolas went with them,
for this was to be their last night in Lothlorien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to
take counsel together.

It was plain that most of
them desired to go first to Minas Tirith, and to escape at least for a while from the terror of the
Enemy.

They would have been willing to follow a leader over the River and into the shadow of
Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind.

His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go with Boromir, and with his
sword help to deliver Gondor.

But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid on him; and he knew that he could
not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to go with Boromir.

And yet what help could
he or any of the Company give to Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?

'I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,' said Boromir; and after that he
was silent for a while, sitting with his eyes fixed on Frodo, as if he was trying to read the halfling's
thoughts.

'If you wish only to
destroy the Ring,' he said, 'then there is little use in war and weapons; and the Men of Minas Tirith
cannot help.

But if you wish to destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then it is folly to go
without force into his domain; and folly to throw away.'

Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and
made no sign that he had heeded Boromir's words.

In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slender goods, Elves that could speak
their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts of food and clothing for the journey.

'They are fair
garments, and the web is good, for it was made in this land.

And you will find
them a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you walk among the stones
or the trees.

Your path now goes south.'

They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they came on a high green wall.

Before them lay a long lawn of
shining grass, studded with golden elanor that glinted in the sun.

No
mallorn lifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lorien.

Some were
brightly painted, and shone with silver and gold and green, but most were either white or grey.

Three small grey boats had been made ready for the travellers, and in these the Elves stowed their
goods.

They may be a help in many needs.'
'You don't need to tell me that!' said Sam. 'I came without any and I've been worried ever
since.

The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in one boat; Boromir,
Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the third were Legolas and Gimli, who had now become fast
friends.

In this last boat most of the goods and packs were stowed.

When all was ready Aragorn
led them on a trial up the Silverlode.

Here and there golden leaves tossed and floated on the rippling stream.

Its beak shone like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its
huge white wings were half lifted.

In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind
him stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her hair, and in her hand she
held a harp, and she sang.

Sad and sweet was the sound of her voice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:

Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.

There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching
years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears.

Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.

Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside.

After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, Celeborn spoke to them again of their
journey, and lifting his hand he pointed south to the woods beyond the Tongue.
'As you go down the water,' he said, 'you will find that the trees will fail, and you will come to
a barren country.

There the Entwash flows in by
many mouths from the Forest of Fangorn in the west.

The wind blows from
the East there, for they look out over the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and
the black gates of Mordor.

'Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do well to leave the Great River
above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds the marshes.

Yet they should not go too far up
that stream, nor risk becoming entangled in the Forest of Fangorn.

But Boromir and Aragorn doubtless do not need this warning.'

'Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,' said Boromir.

Of old Fangorn lay upon the
borders of our realm; but it is now many lives of men since any of us visited it, to prove or disprove
the legends that have come down from distant years.

After that journey, and the road I have trodden with this Company, I do not much doubt
that I shall find a way through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.'
'Then I need say no more,' said Celeborn.

But before you
go, I have brought in my ship gifts which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in
memory of Lothlorien.'

'Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your Company,' she said to

Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made to fit his sword.

It was overlaid with a
tracery of flowers and leaves wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven runes formed of
many gems the name Anduril and the lineage of the sword.
'The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stained or broken even in defeat,' she
said.

And Aragorn answered: 'Lady, you know all my desire, and long held in keeping the only
treasure that I seek.

Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast, and those who saw him
wondered; for they had not marked before how tall and kingly he stood, and it seemed to them that
many years of toil had fallen from his shoulders.

The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boromir, and to him she gave a belt of gold;
and to Merry and Pippin she gave small silver belts, each with a clasp wrought like a golden flower.

To Legolas she gave a bow such as the Galadhrim used, longer and stouter than the bows of
Mirkwood, and strung with a string of elf-hair.

She put
into his hand a little box of plain grey wood, unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid.

Though you should find all barren and laid waste,
there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you sprinkle this earth
there.

For our spring and our summer are gone by, and they will never be seen on earth
again save in memory.'

Nothing, unless
it might be – unless it is permitted to ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair, which surpasses
the gold of the earth as the stars surpass the gems of the mine.

For none have ever made to me a request so
bold and yet so courteous.

And if
ever I return to the smithies of my home, it shall be set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of
my house, and a pledge of good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.'

Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut off three golden hairs, and laid them
in Gimli's hand.

'These words shall go with the gift,' she said.

But if hope should not fail,
then I say to you, Gimli son of Gloin, that your hands shall flow with gold, and yet over you gold
shall have no dominion.

May it be a light to you in dark places, when all other lights go out.

For so it seemed to them: Lorien was slipping
backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees, sailing on to forgotten shores, while they
sat helpless upon the margin of the grey and leafless world.

Namarie!
'Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years numberless as the wings of trees!

Maybe
thou shalt find Valimar.

Maybe even thou shalt find it.

'I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,' he said to Legolas his companion.

'Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest?

Now I have taken my worst wound in this parting, even if I
were to go this night straight to the Dark Lord.

Alas for Gimli son of Gloin!'
'Nay!' said Legolas.

For
such is the way of it: to find and lose, as it seems to those whose boat is on the running stream.

He took up a
paddle, and steered towards the western bank, following Aragorn's boat ahead, which had already
moved out of the middle stream.

Aragorn let them drift with the stream as they wished, husbanding their
strength against weariness to come.

What pestilence or war or evil deed of the
Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell.

There was no sign of living moving things, save birds.

Once or twice the travellers heard the
rush and whine of swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky.
'Swans!' said Sam. 'And mighty big ones too!'
'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and they are black swans.'
'How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks!' said Frodo.

'I always imagined
that as one journeyed south it got warmer and merrier, until winter was left behind for ever.'

'But we have not journeyed far south yet,' answered Aragorn.

Ere long we shall come to the
mouth of the Limlight that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River.

The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer night in some northern glade
amid the beech-woods; Gimli was fingering gold in his mind, and wondering if it were fit to be
wrought into the housing of the Lady's gift.

Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for
Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt
consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn's.

Sam had long ago made up his mind that, though boats were maybe not as
dangerous as he had been brought up to believe, they were far more uncomfortable than even he had
imagined.

As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed heads of Frodo
and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and longed for camp and the feel of earth
under his toes.

Gollum, maybe?'
'Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,' said Frodo.

In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to find Sam shaking him.

Aragorn stirred in
his sleep, turned over, and sat up.

Why have you drawn your sword?'
'Gollum,' answered Frodo.

'Or at least, so I guess.'
'Ah!' said Aragorn.

'We shall have to try going faster tomorrow.

The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadow again.

After that the
Company kept a sharp look-out, but they saw no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted.

At Aragorn's bidding they paddled now for long
spells, and the banks went swiftly by.

As they lay in their camp that day
Aragorn watched the flights doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the
news of their voyage was now moving in the wilderness.

'What is that, Legolas?' he asked, pointing to the northern sky.

'Is it, as I think, an eagle?'
'Yes.' said Legolas.

It is far from
the mountains.'
'We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn.

said Aragorn.

'Hoy there, Aragorn!' shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped into the leader.

cried Aragorn. '

He drove his paddle into the water, trying
to hold the boat and bring it round.

One smote Frodo between the shoulders and he lurched forward with a cry,
letting go his paddle; but the arrow fell back, foiled by his hidden coat of mail.

Another passed
through Aragorn's hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry's
hand.

'Yrch! ' said Legolas, falling into his own tongue.

'Gollum's doing, I'll be bound.'

Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he had brought from Lorien.

'Elbereth Gilthoniel! ' sighed Legolas as he looked up.

After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream.

'Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas!' said Gimli, as he munched
a wafer of lembas .

'That was a mighty shot in the dark, my friend!'
'But who can say what it hit?' said Legolas.

'Whatever it was, its fall has dismayed our
enemies.'
'So it seems,' said Aragorn. '

'In that land, maybe, we were in a time that
has elsewhere long gone by.

And I don't remember any
moon, either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day.'
Legolas stirred in his boat. '

Rich are the
hours, though short they seem, in Caras Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.'
'That should not have been said outside Lorien, not even to me,' said Aragorn.

Winter is nearly gone.

Now perhaps we can get away
without those cursed goblins seeing us.'
'Perhaps so,' said Aragorn.

'But it will be hard to find the path unless the fog lifts a little later
on.

And we must find the path, if we are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.'

'If
the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike westward and
southward, until we come to the Entwash and cross into my own land.'
'We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,' said Aragorn, 'but that is not yet agreed.

'And even if you pass the Gates of
Argonath and come unmolested to the Tindrock, what will you do then?

Leap down the Falls and
land in the marshes?'
'No!' answered Aragorn. 'Say rather that we will bear our boats by the ancient way to
Rauros-foot, and there take to the water again.

Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it became plain that Frodo would follow
Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave in.

To
the tall isle I will go, but no further.

There I shall turn to my home, alone if my help has not earned

the reward of any companionship.'

It was decided that Aragorn and
Legolas should at once go forward along the shore, while the others remained by the boats.

Aragorn
hoped to find some way by which they could carry both their boats and their baggage to the
smoother water beyond the Rapids.

No road was made by the Men of Gondor in
this region, for even in their great days their realm did not reach up Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil;
but there is a portage-way somewhere on the western shore, if I can find it.

It cannot yet have
perished; for light boats used to journey out of Wilderland down to Osgiliath, and still did so until a
few years ago, when the Orcs of Mordor began to multiply.'

'If you go forward, peril will grow with every mile, even if you find a path.'

'Peril lies ahead on every southward road,' answered Aragorn.

It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb the steep bank and
vanish into the mists; but his fears proved groundless.

'All is well,' said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank.

'There is a track, and it leads to a
good landing that is still serviceable.

We did not find where the northward
landing lies.

'Yet such as we are we will try it,' said Aragorn.

'The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, while a Dwarf goes on,
be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir!'

The goods were taken out of the
boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was a level space.

Of what tree
growing in the elvish country they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was tough and
yet strangely light.

One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while the others toiled and scrambled
after them with the baggage.

Then with little
further hindrance, save from sprawling briars and many fallen stones, they moved forward all
together.

'We need sleep, and
even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too tired – except, no
doubt, our sturdy dwarf.'

'Let us rest as much as we can now,' said Aragorn.

Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, we shall have a good chance of slipping
through, unseen by any eyes on the eastern shore.

The fogs and mists
were gone.

'Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings!' cried Aragorn.

Then he saw that they were indeed shaped
and fashioned: the craft and power of old had wrought upon them, and still they preserved through
the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which they had been hewn.

In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud
and erect, guiding the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was
blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to his own land.

But whither now shall I go?'

'Behold Tol Brandir!' said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak.

They could go no
further without choice between the east-way and the west.

The last stage of the Quest was before
them.

Chapter 10
The Breaking of the Fellowship
Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River.

'Here we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn.

If Gollum had contrived to follow them, he
remained unseen and unheard.

Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often
in his sleep and waking.

In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn it was to
watch.

'It is not your watch.'
'I do not know,' answered Aragorn; 'but a shadow and a threat has been growing in my sleep.

'Are enemies at hand?'
'Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn.

'Not very near, and yet too near, it seems.'
'I feared as much,' said Aragorn.

We must go
warily tomorrow.'

The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold.

When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together.

Shall we turn west with Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor;
or turn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and that as
each may choose?

'Well, Frodo,' said Aragorn at last.

Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity.

'Very well, Frodo son of Drogo,' he said.

Sam, who had been watching his master with
great concern, shook his head and muttered: 'Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee
putting in his spoke just now.'

Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while the others restrained
themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until he passed
out of sight in the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.

He came to a path, the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago.

If Aragorn is right and Orcs are near,
then none of us should wander alone, and you least of all: so much depends on you.

But two together may perhaps
find wisdom.'

'But I do not think that any speech will help me.

'I wish to help you.

For you seem ever to
think only of its power in the hands of the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good.

Boromir got up and walked about impatiently.

'So you go on,' he cried.

in our need chance brings to light
the Ring of Power.

What could not Aragorn do?

Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly; almost he seemed to have forgotten
Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the mustering of men; and he drew plans for
great alliances and glorious victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mighty
king, benevolent and wise.

But is it not really your good sense that
revolts?'
'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo.

'You need rest before your venture, if go you must.'

It is not yours save by unhappy chance.

It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of Minas
Morgul, and the haunted Mountains, and it looked upon Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the Land
of Mordor.

It leaped towards him;
almost like a finger he felt it, searching for him.

I will go alone.

I will go alone.

'I must go now or I shall never go.

Every now and again
they made efforts to speak of other things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned
Aragorn concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, and the remnants of its great works
that could still be seen in this strange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone kings and the seats of
Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside the falls of Rauros.

Why was he hesitating?
'He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,' said Aragorn.

It
is now more hopeless than ever for the Company to go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum,
and must fear that the secret of our journey is already betrayed.

Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.'
'Grievous is our loss,' said Legolas.

Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo?

'We, of course, were only sent to help the Bearer along the road,
to go no further than we wished; and none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount
Doom.

I would choose Minas Tirith, but
if he does not, then I follow him.'

'And I too will go with him,' said Legolas.

'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn.

'But if he goes east, then all
need not go with him; nor do I think that all should.

Boromir will return to
his own city, where his father and his people need him; and with him the others should go, or at
least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is not willing to leave us.'
'That won't do at all!' cried Merry.

Pippin and I always intended to go
wherever he went, and we still do.

It would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor.

He knows
we shan't agree to his going east.

And he doesn't like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow.

Imagine it: going off to Mordor alone!'

'But the dear silly old hobbit, he ought to
know that he hasn't got to ask.

He isn't
hesitating about which way to go.

What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway?

'Now where's he got to?' cried Sam, looking worried.

But Mr. Frodo, he knows he's got to find the Cracks of Doom, if he can.

And he isn't worrying about us
either: whether we'll go along with him or no.

If he screws himself up to go, he'll want to go alone.

We're going
to have trouble when he comes back.

For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's
Baggins.'
'I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,' said Aragorn. '

Don't let him go!' cried Pippin.

'I wonder?' said Aragorn. '

Surely the time is up?'
'Yes,' said Aragorn.

asked Aragorn.

I urged him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east.

I could not find him again.

I thought he would
return to you.'
'Is that all that you have to say?' said Aragorn, looking hard and not too kindly at Boromir.

He didn't ought to have; and if he has, goodness knows what may have
happened!'
'But he wouldn't keep it on,' said Merry.

'Not when he had escaped the unwelcome visitor, like
Bilbo used to.'
'But where did he go?

'He's been away ages now.'
'How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir?' asked Aragorn.

'We must try and find him at once.

cried Aragorn.

It was no good.

Legolas and Gimli were running.

'We shall all be scattered and lost,' groaned Aragorn.

I do not know what part you
have played in this mischief, but help now!

Go after those two young hobbits, and guard them at the
least, even if you cannot find Frodo.

Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him.

Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam.

I
am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen, to see what may be seen.

He
had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead.

He made up his mind at last to go.

He's got no gear.

So he's
got to get back to the boats.

Up he got and ran on.

'Now take my hand!'
'Save me, Mr. Frodo!' gasped Sam. 'I'm drownded.

I won't let you go.

'That's hard, trying to go without me and all.

'Safely!' said Sam. 'All alone and without me to help you?

But I am going to Mordor.'

But I must go at once.

I'm coming too, or neither of us isn't going.

He rushed to the camping place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo
had laid it when he emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a spare blanket, and some
extra packages of food, and ran back.

'It is no good trying to escape you.

It is plain that we were meant to go together.

We will go,
and may the others find a safe road!

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together.

Even with such help as Sam could give, it
was hard work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive the boat
eastward towards the far shore.

Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would bring
them over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and down into the Land of Shadow.

