Where are we, Gandalf?

In the realm of Gondor, The land of Anórien is still passing by. What is that? Sleep again, and do not be afraid! You do not comfort me, Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir, I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor, Many a doer of great deeds might say no more, But what is a hobbit? Nay, not the one that was spoken of, Yes, and one who journeyed with him,

The news of that grief should have been told first to the father. It has been guessed already, Fare you well! Because I come seldom but when my help is needed, The work will be finished ere evening,

Now we know that the storm is indeed nigh! It is upon you,

Why not? What is wrong with Strider? He meant to come here, didn ll be arriving soon himself anyway.

Dark indeed is the hour,

Yet a Halfling still,

He would have gone, I have received this, That is the horn that Boromir always wore! Thirteen, thirteen days, The mightiest man may be slain by one arrow, s evening, passed over the old man Whence came this? It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country, I see that strange tales are woven about you, Take the hilt, and speak after the Lord, if you are resolved on this.

Bring wine and food and seats for the guests, It is all that I have to spare, for there is much else to heed, And earlier, it is to be hoped, How much older? Now tell me your tale, my liege, I could now eat three breakfasts on end. Lead the Lord Mithrandir to the housing prepared for him,

If you understand it, then be content, s, unless the king should come again. Unless the king should come again? Are you angry with me, Gandalf? You did indeed! Indeed you did your best,

I am in haste Pippin, d call it in the Shire, You are Peregrin the Halfling? Who is he? he was a man who went about with us. I think he is in Rohan now. An old campaigner, I see, Well, yes, to speak in courtesy, yes,

That is what we call ourselves, I am glad to learn it, He looks as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a great journey, How strong and proud he is! Where is his harness? It should be rich and fair. None is rich and fair enough for him, And now for our manger, This is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the Guard. he called through the hatch.

I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin, What can I see there? Is that another city, or what is it?

It was a city, The Black Riders? Yes, they were black, I know of them, but I will not speak of them now, so near, so near - So near to Mordor? Only because everything is now ready, But why were the beacons lit last night? It is over-late to send for aid when you are already besieged,

What was that? You also felt something? Yes, the shadow of doom, It is passed, All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill, Ah, there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel!

he thought, but he said nothing. Will you come with me? I shall be glad to come, Then it is far beyond me, Farewell for this time!

Where do you come from? You are a stranger in the City. but they say I have become a man of Gondor. Which question shall I answer first? he added hopefully, Maybe you could, if I let you, I am Bergil son of Beregond of the Guards, So I thought, Then why did you not say so at once? His message is less bad than that, if not good. All is well, What is happening there? That is good! There is dust away there! They are coming! What do they say?

Forlong has come, True heart, true friend! Forlong! So ends a fair day in wrath! So it will, if I have not returned before the sundown-bells, Farewell for this time, Can you find your way?

When will Faramir return? But the night will be too short,

So four of the Company still remain, And then whither? I cannot say yet, I for one! And Gimli with him! Well, for myself, t leave me behind! I have not been of much use yet; but I don

Rohan? Rohan did you say? That is a glad word. We seek that land in haste from long afar. You have found it, Halbarad Dunadan, Ranger of the North I am, And you have found him also! Of all joys this is the least expected! All is well, I have thirty with me, But I did not summon you, It is well! Always my days have seemed to me too short to achieve my desire, That will soon be seen, What is that that you bear, kinsman? It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell, Now I know what you bear. Bear it still for me a while!

The Sun is high, There was a battle here three nights ago, Nay! There is no time, Where is Aragorn? In a high chamber of the Burg, They are a strange company, these newcomers, But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence. Why have they come? Have you heard? They answered a summons, as you heard, Yes, you have it, I do not think that any would come, It is not as I would have it, That would be splendid! I am afraid I am only in everybody I doubt it not,

There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord. I have a sword, May I lay the sword of Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap Théoden King? Receive my service, if you will! Gladly will I take it, Rise now, Meriadoc, esquire of Rohan of the household of Meduseld! Take your sword and bear it unto good fortune! As a father you shall be to me, For a little while, We will make ready to ride, I am troubled in mind, lord, It is now a full hour past noon,

The Paths of the Dead! Why do you speak of them? If there be in truth such paths, Alas! Aragorn my friend! That road I will take, nonetheless, You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn, There go three that I love, and the smallest not the least, A little people, but of great worth are the Shire-folk, And now our fates are woven together, A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the Hornburg, I have looked in the Stone of Orthanc, my friends. You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry! Did you say aught to – him? Even Gandalf feared that encounter. You forget to whom you speak,

But he wields great dominion, nonetheless, and now he will strike more swiftly. The hasty stroke goes oft astray, Then lost it must be, I have no help to send, therefore I must go myself, The Paths of the Dead! The living have never used that road since the coming of the Rohirrim, And what may be the words of the seer? Dark ways doubtless, but no darker than these staves are to me. If you would understand them better, then I bid you come with me, I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever end they may lead, I also will come, for I do not fear the Dead. I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to fight, That we shall know if ever we come to Erech,

To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the Dead. Come with me who will! Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted, They may suffer me to pass, But this is madness, It is not madness, lady,

why will you go on this deadly road? Because I must, You are a stern lord and resolute, and thus do men win renown. Your duty is with your people, Too often have I heard of duty, Few may do that with honour, Shall I always be chosen? A time may come soon, What do you fear, lady? So may one counsel another, Nor would I,

Aragorn, wilt thou go? Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked? I will not, lady, I beg thee! My blood runs chill, This is an evil door, But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too,

Here is a thing unheard of! Does he feel no fear? In any other cave Gimli Glóin For that is not my errand!

The Dead are following, Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned, Where in Middle-earth are we? The King of the Dead! The King of the Dead is come upon us! Oathbreakers, why have ye come? To fulfil our oath and have peace. s heir of Gondor.

he said to himself reproachfully. Harrowdale at last! Our journey is almost at an end. This journey is over, maybe, But if you would take my counsel, At dawn three days ago, lord, The winged Shadow? It is well,

Hail, Lord of the Mark! My heart is glad at your returning. And you, Éowyn, is all well with you? All is well, So Aragorn has come then, Is he still here? No, he is gone, Whither did he go? I do not know, You are grieved, daughter, He pointed away along the darkening lines of stones towards the Dwimorberg. Then our paths are sundered, The Paths of the Dead, s esquire, to wait at the king

Come, Master Meriadoc! Twice now, lord, I have heard of the Paths of the Dead, No man knows, Yet it is said in Harrowdale, Then why has Aragorn gone that way? Unless he has spoken words to you as his friend that we have not heard, Greatly changed he seemed to me since I saw him first in the king grimmer, older. Fey I thought him, and like one whom the Dead call. Maybe he was called, But how shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by daring the Door?

A man is here, lord, Let him come! The Red Arrow! That is best known to yourself, lord, What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot say,

At the least we will do that, Go now each to your rest, I will be ready, even if you bid me ride with you on the Paths of the Dead. Speak not words of omen! t be left, I won Wake up, wake up. Master Holbytla! What is the matter? The king calls for you. But the Sun has not risen, yet, It comes from Mordor, lord, So we come to it in the end, We have very great store long prepared, Then call the heralds, Éomer, Let the Riders be marshalled! I am going to war, Master Meriadoc, But, but, lord,

But we ride on horses tall and swift, Then tie me on to the back of one, or let me hang on a stirrup, or something, Rather than that I would bear you with me on Snowmane, Come now, Meriadoc! They went out together. No mail have we to fit you, Take all these things,

This is no journey for such steeds as Stybba, as I have told you, As for that, who can tell? I received you for your safe-keeping, Where will wants not, a way opens , so we say, and so I have found myself. Then you shall go with me, Thank you indeed! Thank you, sir, though I do not know your name. Do you not? Then call me Dernhelm.

Ride on! Ride on!

What is the time? Past the second hour, And will he provide breakfast? No! I have provided it: all that you will get till noon. Food is now doled out by order. Why did you bring me here? You know quite well, What would you do in my service? I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties. I will, when I learn what you are fit for,

You are weary of this day?

They have come! Black Riders of the air! But see, Beregond! Faramir! The Lord Faramir! It is his call!

Whence come you? A halfling, and in the livery of the Tower! Whence…? But now we come to strange matters, Cirith Ungol? Morgul Vale? I parted with them in the morning two days ago, Some twenty-five leagues as a bird flies,

If what I have done displeases you, my father, Would that have availed to change your judgement? So be it, So be it! Do you wish then, that our places had been exchanged? Yes, I wish that indeed, For Boromir was loyal to me and no wizard s restraint gave way. Stir not the bitterness in the cup that I mixed for myself, he said softly. What then is your wisdom? And the Lord Denethor what would he have done? You think, as is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only, And where will other men look for help, if Gondor falls?

Nonetheless I do not trust you, If I had! If you had! He turned to Faramir. It is not strong, Not enough, I deem, There and elsewhere in many places, You are weary, I see, Let us not speak of that! Then we will not, Go now and rest as you may. Tomorrow is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at least mostly for Frodo. s hope, as I have been told. And when I heard of Cirith Ungol–––

Only one but will I allow tonight. I cannot answer that now, They give him no rest, And ever men looked northward, asking: That was but a trial, And what of Cair Andros? Much must be risked in war, I do so, But if I should return, think better of me! That depends on the manner of your return, Yes, he will come,

And we have learned, If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his heels, Then I am needed there more than here, They have taken the wall! They are blasting breaches in it. They are coming! Where is Faramir? Say not that he has fallen! Is Faramir come? Not – the Dark Lord? Then, Mithrandir, you had a foe to match you, It might be so,

And we also have few. Now would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of time, We are likely to see other newcomers first, Some have accused you, Mithrandir, of delighting to bear ill news, Faramir must be there, Amroth for Gondor! Amroth to Faramir!

There is no news of the Rohirrim,

But some answered:

Do not weep, lord, Perhaps he will get well. Have you asked Gandalf? Comfort me not with wizards! Nay, I will not come down, The first circle of the City is burning, lord, Why? Why do the fools fly?

he said sadly. I will not say farewell, my lord, I will take your leave, sir, Do as you will, Master Halfling, But my life is broken. Send for my servants! Here we will wait,

By your leave, lord! Who is the master of Minas Tirith? The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem, Whither do you run, Master Peregrin? To find Mithrandir, to the Silent Street. They said that he was dying, s strange words and deeds. Then you must go down to the battle. Well, you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir,

You cannot enter here,

I am not a tree-root, Sir, Anything that can keep so in this devil Is the enemy coming then? s commands. Pack yourself up, Master Bag!

No, father of Horse-men, But our need is for aid in battle, How will you and your folk help us? sit on horse-road. Very many, more than Horse-men. How do you know that? Wild men are wild, free, but not children, Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly, And yet we need great haste, Mundburg is on fire! Let Ghan-buri-Ghan finish! We will receive your offer, Dead men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts, So be it! How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road? Wild Men go quick on feet, he waved his hand southwards, Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders, All is night now. It is all dark, but it is not all night. Then we must set out as soon as may be, s aid today.

No good to send Horse-men, Wild Men say many things, s walk yonder, But none to see between here and Stone-folk Even in this gloom hope gleams again. Our Enemy Once again I thank you, Ghan-buri-Ghan of the woods, Kill gorgun ! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men, To do these things we have ridden far, Wind is changing! We need no further guidance,

Then since we must look for fell deeds and the need of all our strength, What of it? Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never , There are great fires, lord, Do you remember the Wild Man If you speak truly, Widfara, then may you live beyond this day in years of blessedness! Éomer, my son! You lead the first éored , and it shall go behind the king s words: in such a battle what would you do Meriadoc? Just this,

To me! To me! Up Eorlingas! Fear no darkness!

s man! King his heart cried within him. Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion! Leave the dead in peace! Do what you will; but I will hinder it, if I may. Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!

Farewell, Master Holbytla! Forgive me, lord, Hail, King of the Mark! Ride now to victory! Bid Éowyn farewell!

Let his knights remain here, Death! Ride, ride to ruin and the world s household they could not yet bring from the field; for seven of the king What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan?

Nay! One only, Men of Rohan! Haste now is needed,

The Corsairs of Umbar! Back to the walls! Back to the walls! Come back to the City before all are overwhelmed! s end I rode and to heart

Thus we meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor lay between us, So you spoke, Nor indeed more timely, Then let us avenge it, ere we speak of it!

What are you doing here? t you do something? I must go, Burn him alive? What is this tale? Be quick! Denethor has gone to the Tombs, m afraid he won s knee with trembling hands. t you save Faramir? Maybe I can, Rohan has come! You will need every man and more, Darkness is passing, but it still lies heavy on this City.

Then Beregond has gone, Work of the Enemy! Now he dismounted and bade Shadowfax return to his stable. What is this, my lord? Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee? He lies within, Do not take my son from me! He calls for me.

He will not wake again, Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of your death, We are needed. There is much that you can yet do. Pride and despair! Such counsels will make the Enemy Hope on then! What then would you have, if your will could have its way? I would have things as they were in all the days of my life, Thou hadst already stolen half my son Come, if you are not all recreant!

So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion, s servants that stood there aghast. This deed I shall ever rue, This should now be given to the Lord Faramir, The Prince of Dol Amroth is in command in the absence of the Lord,

Now I understand what seemed so strange to me! Alas! then I have guessed rightly,

This is a tunnel leading to a tomb; there we shall stay forever. Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you! Where is the king? They have gone up into the Citadel, Well, no, I don s face was anxious. t fit to walk any further. They shouldn s not always a misfortune being overlooked, t speak of it. Help me, Pippin! It Lean on me, Merry lad! Come now! Foot by foot. It Are you going to bury me? No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.

ll never get him there, Is there no one to help me? I can Where are you going? Glad to see you again, and still alive! I am running errands for the Healers, I cannot stay. d better wait here, He should have been borne in honour into this city, I have been too busy with this and that to heed all the crying and shouting,

s House. Will you suffer these to be challenged? Not a beggar, The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses of Healing. He is come.

t listen to me. How did you do it? Well met indeed! You have store in this House of the herbs of healing? I will judge that when I see, I do not know, I am sure, lord, It is also called kingsfoil , kingsfoil” I said, And if not, s hand in his, and laid the other hand upon the sick man He is nearly spent,

I drew it forth, Weariness, grief for his father I do so, Your pardon lord! It is kingsfoil, Sir, It will serve, The worst is now over. Stay and be comforted! Well now! Who would have believed it?

Walk no more in the shadows, but awake! I will, lord, For who would lie idle when the king has returned? Farewell then for a while! I must go to others who need me. King! Did you hear that? What did I say? The hands of a healer, I said. I marvel that you should ask me, lord, Think you that Wormtongue had poison only for Théoden

Awake, Éowyn, Lady of Rohan! Awake! The shadow is gone and all darkness is washed clean! s and stepped away. Not long, my sister, But think no more on it! I am strangely weary, He is dead, That is grievous, He lies nearby in this House, and I will go to him, Poor old Merry! Do not be afraid, I am hungry. What is the time? Past supper-time now, They will indeed, Then I would like supper first, and after that a pipe. No, not a pipe. I don ll smoke again.

Smoke then, and think of him! s best in my pack, but what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don I am frightfully sorry, I know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way, Was there ever any one like him? s be easy for a bit. Dear me! We Tooks and Brandybucks, we can The Lady Éowyn, As for Faramir, It is likely that he will be fit to arise tomorrow, for a short while, They are a remarkable race,

The King is come again indeed.

It is good to learn that they are still alive, There is some good stone-work here, They need more gardens, s haven west over water. So it is said in the lore of my land, I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir from Imladris, You will find them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you thither, It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord, We will come, That is a fair lord and a great captain of men, And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought in the first building, Yet seldom do they fail of their seed, And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess, To that the Elves know not the answer,

Say not so! Dull and dreary indeed! t be so gloomy! The Sun may shine here, The Paths of the Dead? t you tell us some more? For upon that road I was put to shame: Gimli Glóin And by the love of him also, Alas! I had heart only for myself, Nay! I will not speak of that journey. They may serve his needs yet!

For my part I heeded them not, Now come! By the Black Stone I call you!

Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings, It is forty leagues and two from Pelargir to the landings at the Harlond,” he said. “Up with your beard, Durin Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth, And that may well befall, And I for the folk of the Great Wood,

That would be no new counsel, I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg, But how is this? He is not yet sure,

As for myself, As for me, That is true, All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous, We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this field,

The Gate is destroyed, In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dain there is such skill, No, he will try to trap the fly and take the sting, Neither shall we,

The perishing is more likely, and will be a lot easier anyway,

I wonder if they think of us at all, and what is happening to them all away there.

m coming, Mr. Frodo! Better have a look at the worst, No good blundering about in a fog!

And anyway all these notions are only a trick, t use the Ring! And if ever I get any further, it s to be done?

s company had seemed to be about forty, and Gorbag Come on, you miserable sluggard! Now for it! s done it! Tell Captain Shagrat that the great Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too! ll be near the back, I guess, d better follow these lights.

Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose! m coming. Just you show me the way up, or I s nobody left alive in the place! Frodo, Frodo! Master! m coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.

s safe to flout me, you ll deal with you: I re dead anyway, Then you must go. I must stay here anyway. But I ll both be for the Black Pits. Yes, you too. You won m not going down those stairs again, ll put an arrow in your guts. You won s enough from you, t listen. And you won s got past the Watchers, and that s work. He m not going down. Not if you were a Nazgûl, I wouldn ll do this, and you ll bolt and leave me? No, you won ll put red maggot-holes in your belly first. Got you, Gorbag! Not quite dead, eh? Well, I

s my job to go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards. A dead end, and after all my climb! This can

Beyond all towers strong and high, Ho la! You up there, you dunghill rat! Stop your squeaking, or I re up to. You lie quiet, or you ve not got long to live in peace, I guess; but if you don s a reminder for you! Frodo! Mr. Frodo, my dear! s Sam, I Am I still dreaming? But the other dreams were horrible. re not dreaming at all, Master, s real. It

I can hardly believe it, It was indeed, Mr. Frodo. I t find you. Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, Come! Wake up Mr. Frodo! Where are we? How did I get here? s no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo, t know. More than a day, I guess. Yes, I can walk, ve a pain here. Yes, they quarrelled, seemingly, s lucky, but it s to be done? You can ve taken everything, Sam, No, not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it hasn ve kept it safe. It But I suppose you must take it back. ve got it? ve got it here? Sam, you Give it to me! Give it me at once! You can All right, Mr. Frodo, Here it is! ll see the Fiery Mountain and all. You s too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?

t be altered. You can s all right, Mr. Frodo, t I? I re in Mordor, we t no choice. It m afraid. And for me too. If we go together, we s glass. I t have to go far. Take care, Sam! And be quick! There may be orcs still alive, lurking in wait. ve got to chance it, s something that might be useful, Quick now, Mr. Frodo! ll have to make do. But we must hurry. I m not easy. I think this place is being watched. I can t be seen. The Morgul-stuff, Gorbag He put a large black cloak round Frodo

What about you, Sam? t we going to match? Well, Mr. Frodo, I t destroy it. And I can ll just have to cover up. said Frodo with a wry smile. Save me, but so I had! Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but you d forgotten it, trying to find you. But let me think! Last time I looked I s a drop left in my bottle, there t orcs eat, and don ll take, if they can get no better, but not poison. They Well, things are a bit better than you think, s scattered about and some of it is trampled and broken, but I s not far short of what you ve taken Faramir ve slashed up my water-bottle. ve got enough to start on. But the water Not till you m going to faint. I don s come over me. I do, Mr. Frodo. Hold up now! It m going to get out. It can

Gilthoniel, A Elbereth! Aiya elenion ancalima!

Run, Mr. Frodo! No, not that way! There

But we can

Quick, Sam! Over we go! Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo, t know as anything grew in Mordor! But if I had a ve stuck through everything I Now down we go, Sam, If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of water, I t say such things! It only makes it worse. Wake up, Sam! Come on! It Well I never! I must have dropped off. It s no good, Sam, t win through by fighting. But we may have some to do, t dead, for one thing. I don Look here, Sam dear lad, I am tired, weary, I haven t think I

t talk about it, Mr. Frodo. Bless you! I What I really need is something warm, s gone cold, or else I You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo, s this, Mr. Frodo? t look quite orc-fashion, but it ll keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by the Lady. t see them now. There now, Mr. Frodo, it s talking of water this time! Look at it, Mr. Frodo! Look at it! The wind What did I tell you? Something The war's going well, t you got some hope now? Well no, not much, Sam, s away beyond the mountains. We Come, Mr. Frodo! s dangerous too. Try a bit further, and then we food; it may hearten you.

If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her! Then he stopped. All right, but there I do. But I think we This is where we turn aside, Sam, And we must turn east. said Sam, waving his arms. d got an orc

s bag of Faramir Now you go to sleep first, Mr. Frodo,

Whatever they have to eat and drink, we can Still we shall have to try, t see any hope of it now. But I I guess what it ll see, Mr. Frodo. I dare say I shall, if we ever get so far,

m going home. s not a trace left, I say. I Not much use are you, you little snufflers? Then what have you seen with them? Garn! You don re looking for. said the soldier. s a great Elf in bright armour, then it s all the lot together. ve lost their heads, that s the way you fighters go on, small wonder there Who says there Ar! Who says there isn s cursed rebel-talk, and I t shut it down, see? All right, all right! ll say no more and go on thinking. But what s up to no good, nosing around, I s wanted alive, wanted quick. Well, I hope they get him and put him through it, It saved his life anyhow, Garn! You missed him, ve had enough of you. You come back, Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won ll give your name and number to the Nazgûl, One of them You cursed peaching sneakthief!

t get them first. They ve heard, and I hope it Well I call that neat as neat, If this nice friendliness would spread about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over. t dead yet, didn Yes, I remember. And I wondered how you knew, but when I think of that Stinker I get so hot l could shout. Well, I suppose we must be going on again, He stood up. Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo, No, not any clear notion, Sam, s just as I feared, Well, to say nothing of water, we s ended, save the Elves ll try and be a bit quicker, Sam, Come on then! Let

We have come to a dead end, Sam, t climb up westward, or climb down eastward. Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo, t last. We All right, Sam, Lead me! As long as you t dash, Sam. I Well, here goes, Master! ll have to leave you for a bit and trust to luck. Water we must have, or we

Well, luck did not let me down, but that was a near thing! Isn m afraid, Mr. Frodo, Leastways, if it wasn t safe for us both to sleep together, and begging your pardon, but I can Bless you, Sam! Lie down and take your proper turn! But I t give us away to them – not unless he But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on his own, s a bottle full of water. Drink up. We can fill it again when we go on. I feared it, Sam, ve trusted to luck, and it has failed us. We re trapped at last! Well, we can but wait and see. If only they are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired soldiers alone and pass on! Hi, you! Get up!

Come on, you slugs! This is no time for slouching. ll have your numbers and report you. No, not at the rear! ll know it, when I come down the line! d give you a nice freshener now, only you t you know we Come on, Mr. Frodo! One more crawl, and then you can lie still.

he muttered gloomily staring at the threatening mountain, So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started, t. He would have done something. Well, Mr. Frodo, s nothing on the roads, and we s a chance. Can you manage it? I can manage it,

m going back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr. Frodo, t quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.

s will to work for another effort. At length, stooping and caressing Frodo Wake up, Master! Time for another start. Then let me carry it a bit for you, Master, You know I would, and gladly, as long as I have any strength. t touch me! His hand strayed to his sword-hilt. But then quickly his voice changed. He pointed to the Mountain. s no good taking anything we Do you remember that bit of rabbit, Mr. Frodo? s country, the day I saw an oliphaunt? No, I am afraid not, Sam, Then the sooner we

t going to add a sword to it. His hands are bad enough when empty. And he isn m thirsty, Sam, But that was years ago, Well, come now, we he said sturdily. t be a fool, Sam Gamgee, I can go on a good way though, and I will. To the Mountain, of course. t be able to do anything for himself. The Cracks of Doom, Well, if Master knows how to find them, I don There you are! t been so dogged. But you ll never get to the top anyway. ll get there, if I leave everything but my bones behind,

Now for it! Now for the last gasp! d carry him, if it broke my back, and I will! Come, Mr. Frodo!

Thank you, Sam, t know where we

Why, it might have been put there a-purpose! If it wasn d have to say I was beaten in the end. Now, now, or it will be too late! ll crawl, Sam,

t stop it. s spotted us! It Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Sméagol, gollum . He musstn t hurt Preciouss. Give it to Sméagol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!

ll deal with him. Go on! Yes, I must go on, At last I can deal with you! t kill us, re lost. And when Precious goes we Oh, curse you, you stinking thing! Go away! Be off! I don

I have come, And suddenly, as he set it on his finger, he vanished from Sam Precious, precious, precious! My Precious! O my Precious!

Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee, Your poor hand! s gone now beyond recall, gone for ever. But do you remember Gandalf

Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom. The realm of Sauron is ended! The Ring-bearer has fulfilled his Quest. Twice you have borne me, Gwaihir my friend, I would bear you, whither you will, even were you made of stone. The North Wind blows, but we shall outfly it, I am glad that you are here with me, Here at the end of all things, Sam. Yes, I am with you, Master, s finished. But after coming all that way I don s not like me, somehow, if you understand. Maybe not, Sam,

s its name. Now couldn s go down the path at any rate! Very well, Sam. If you wish to go, I s hand caressed it. He sighed. I wish I could hear it told! Do you think they Why, what a dream I Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel? s happened to the world? A great Shadow has departed, How do I feel? Well, I don

He stopped and he turned towards his master. s Mr. Frodo? t it a shame about his poor hand? But I hope he Yes, I am all right otherwise, Noon of what day? The fourteenth of the New Year, What king, and who is he? The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands, What shall we wear? The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor,

Well, if that isn Strider, or I Yes, Sam, Strider, Praise them with great praise! Praise them with great praise! I do not wish for any sword, Tonight at least you should wear one, Sting I gave to you Sam,

Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn s more tales to tell than ours. There are indeed, t understand it at your age! But there it is: you m a dwarf. That you certainly are not, The hands of the King are hands of healing, dear friends,

Well, one can

I am in great unrest, and I cannot lie longer in sloth. I am healed, There are no tidings,

It needs but one foe to breed a war, not two, Master Warden, Is there no deed to do? Who commands in this City? I do not rightly know, Where can I find him? Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know. Do not misunderstand him, lord, What would you have me do, lady? I also am a prisoner of the healers. What do you wish? If it lies in my power, I will do it. I would have you command this Warden, and bid him let me go, I myself am in the Warden But I do not desire healing, It is too late, lady, to follow the Captains, even if you had the strength, But the healers would have me lie abed seven days yet,

And my window does not look eastward. Your window does not look eastward? How should I ease your care, my lord? Would you have my plain answer? Alas, not me, lord! But I doubt not, lord, What do you look for, Éowyn? Does not the Black Gate lie yonder?

Lose what you have found, lord? Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom, It reminds me of Númenor, Then you think that the Darkness is coming?

Do you not know? Two reasons there may be, but which is true, l do not know. I do not wish to play at riddles. Speak plainer! Then if you will have it so, lady, I wished to be loved by another, But I desire no man That I know, I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun, No longer do I desire to be a queen, That is well,

Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor? Nay, cousin! they are not boys, The hands of the king are the hands of a healer

That office is not ended, and it shall be thine and thy heirs s son, Elendil Behold the King!

At last all such things must end, As for Bilbo, I know it well, dear friend, but I would still have your counsel. Not for long now, But I shall die, Turn your face from the green world, and look where all seems barren and cold!

The sign has been given, and the day is not far off. At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!

It is true that I wish to go back to the Shire, Do you wonder at that, Ring-bearer? Then I beg leave to depart soon, In seven days we will go, this will bring you aid. but I can speedily fetch it, if there be need. You shall judge, and what say you now? I will not say that she is the fairest lady that lives. Then I must go for my axe, But first I will plead this excuse,

Nay, you are excused for my part, lord,

Hail, Éomer, King of the Mark! No niggard are you, Éomer, This is an heirloom of our house,

And never before has a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf in a contest of words, Welcome to the Treegarth of Orthanc! Well, come now! To see how your work goes, my friend, Hoom , well, that is fair enough, We know it well, and never shall it be forgotten in Minas Tirith or in Edoras. Never is too long a word even for me, The New Age begins, Then why did he stay to listen? Did you go into Orthanc? Hoom , no, not into Orthanc! l observe, my good Fangorn,

No, not dead, so far as I know, You may be right, That will be seen later, It is locked, Now I thank you once more, s face became sad. Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search, Now by Fangorn Here then at last comes the ending of the Fellowship of the Ring, We will come, if our own lords allow it, I do not know, Eldest. Well, my merry folk, will you drink another draught with me before you go? Indeed we will, Take care take care! For you have already grown since I saw you last.

I wish we could have a Stone that we could see all our friends in, Only one now remains that you could use, Where are you going? What is that to you? You know the answers, Then all the A more reason to have left sooner, Then once more you are going the wrong way, If it be truly the last, I am glad,

Get up, you idiot! ll give you no crust for your supper! Then leave him! So you have come to gloat too, have you, my urchins? I would, if I had any, You can have what I have got left, if you will wait a moment. Take what there is, You are welcome to it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard. Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought! One thief deserves another, Well, I like that! And bought he said. How, I wonder? And I didn s time we got back. m sure it is, But we can Yes, I think you had better do that,

I wish I was going back to Lórien!

How splendid! How wonderful! But where were we? I was invited to the wedding of course,

Well, Mr. Frodo, we t think we m worried about my gaffer, to tell you the truth. Yes, something of everything, Sam, except the Sea, Except the Sea. Well, if you must go, you must, Almost the last drop of the Smaug vintage, I have nothing much to give to you young fellows, t let your heads get too big for your hats! But if you don But if you want to beat the Old Took, Think of me when you smoke them! t smoke now. s become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away? I have lost it, Bilbo dear, I got rid of it, you know. What a pity! I should have liked to see it again. But no, how silly of me! That s too late now; and really I think it s very cosy here, and the food

s done much writing while we ve knocked things into shape, come back, and I t be too critical. Of course I ll come back soon: it won Thank you, my dear fellow! That really is a very great relief to my mind.

Are you in pain, Frodo? Well, yes I am, Alas! there are some wounds that cannot be wholly cured, I fear it may be so with mine,

ll hear all there is to hear. And there you Good evening to you! Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam? m not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin, s been on my mind many a time and the wolves howling and all. Mr. Butterbur! Master! ve come back! Oh have they? I Nob, you woolly-pated ninny! ll not hide from you, for you m forgetting, Bob ponies to the stables, Nob! And you

Now I won ll be tired; and there isn That is just what we should like, too, ll bless you. Well, if you d have been happier, re short of, seeing how we s none to be had from the Shire these days. But I and the best we have; but not the match of Southfarthing, as I m all for Bree in most matters, begging your pardon. s own ears. t say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I t say, Master Gandalf! Well I never! Who No one comes nigh Bree now from Outside, ll believe me. I will indeed, Three and two, ve gone off with them; and it And now they s like a bit of the bad old times tales tell of, I say. It isn Well, no one troubled us, d left all trouble behind us. Ah, that you haven s the pity,

How long will that be? t think we I expect it has, t want no more rabble and ruffians. And we don t want a whole crowd o You will be let alone, Barliman, Up away by Deadmen said Butterbur, looking even more dubious. The Rangers go there, ll have some fair folk riding through. Well, that sounds more hopeful, I He knows it and loves it. Does he now? t wonder. What beer? Not but what my beer s been a comfort in trouble, I will say. But he says your beer is always good. Of course he does. He Him with a crown and all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming to? Better times, for Bree at any rate, I hope so, I ll not deny that I ll put that off until tomorrow. I ve no doubt you he called, going to the door. Now what does that remind me of? Not another letter you Now, now, Mr. Brandybuck, don

s looked after it. What! My Bill? Well, I was born lucky, whatever my gaffer may say. There I am going home now to put my notes in order. Well, good luck on your road, and good luck to your home-coming! said Mr. Butterbur. t doubt you ll be pleased. I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at, I can guess some of it, Whatever it is, Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you can be sure of that. Deep in, but not at the bottom, I am with you at present,

As well as ever, you may be sure, But there aren ll let me through that at any time. Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together, Not to me, To me it feels more like falling asleep again.

s that? Be off! You can Of course we can Sam shouted back. ll tear down your notice when I find it. If you don Bless me! It said old Hob. Then stop gaping at me through the bars, and open the gate! m sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders. Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho? I suppose so, Mr. Baggins; but we have to say just “the Chief” nowadays.

Do you indeed! ll get to hear of it. And if you make so much noise, you s Big Man. We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him, ve not come back too soon. Come on, Pippin! Two is enough. s all this, Gate-breaking? You clear out, or I if you don Give me the key! Neat work, Bill, So much for your Big Man, ll have to put us up. I am sorry, Mr. Merry, but it isn s the matter with the place? Well no, the year This is all too tiresome for me tonight. We ll be better than many places I have seen. Well now, what about a smoke, while you tell us what has been happening in the Shire? Now you shut up, Hob Hayward! You know talk o ll all be in trouble.

All right, all right! s quite enough. I don s work and trouble ahead. Let

s all this? And what else? ll do to go on with, I can add some more, if you like it, There now, Mister, that s the Chief re to come along quiet. We Very well, Mr. Baggins,

ll kindly escort me to The Floating Log , I s closed. There ll take you there. Go on and we Look here, Cock-robin! s all this about the inn being closed? re all closed, The Chief doesn s his Men that has it all. And he doesn You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with such nonsense, And so I would be still, Sam, if I could. But don But you can give it up, stop Shirriffing, if it has stopped being a respectable job, re not allowed to, If I hear not allowed much oftener, m going to get angry. t say as I said Robin lowering his voice. s these Men, Sam, the Chief s been getting worse. Often they beat Then why do you do their work far them? Who sent you to Frogmorton? No one did. We stay here in the big Shirriff-house. We s worse than that: there Ah! So that s right. We aren

Order your fellows back to their places at once, if you don Now get on! Well, come along in your own time! We are going on. ll wait for you outside The Green Dragon , if you haven t dawdle on the way! re breaking arrest, that and I can We shall break a good many things yet, and not ask you to answer, m going right on, Mr. Frodo! m going to see what We ought to find out first what we Like that friend of Bill Ferny Like many that I saw at Isengard, s no road for you any further. And where are those precious Shirriffs? Coming along nicely, Garn, what did I say?

And what difference would that have made, pray? t you trust too much in the Boss ll do what Sharkey says. And what may that be? This country wants waking up and setting to rights, s any more trouble. Then you Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans, Lotho! He knows all right. Don re not wanted, we can put them out of mischief. See? Yes, I see, For one thing, I see that you A beggar in the wilderness! – he snapped his fingers in Frodo ll take notice, perhaps. I am a messenger of the King, You are speaking to the King s bane in you! If you trouble this village again, you will regret it. Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho, Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean? Destroy him I should say. Well I am staggered!

But if there are many of these ruffians, it will certainly mean fighting. You won re only four, even if we are armed. ve an idea, s go to old Tom Cotton Raise the Shire! ll go up in fire. The Chief ll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. We Sam, you can make a dash for Cotton On, lad! On! ll be going back soon.

Sam heard the farmer say. s all this to-do? s Sam, Sam Gamgee. I ve been in foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead. That I ain s here and his friends. And that re going to clear out these ruffians, and their Chief too. We t help. And I What about Mrs. Cotton and Rosie? My Nibs is with them. But you can go and help him, if you have a mind,

Sam Gamgee! So don ve a mail-shirt on me. ve you been I They said you were dead; but I t hurried have you? ve got to get back to Mr. Frodo. But I thought I re keeping nicely, thank you, Or should be, if it weren Well, be off with you! you want to leave him for, as soon as things look dangerous? I think you look fine, Sam, s hard to tell, They moves about and comes and goes. There s at Bag End, or was; but he don t let no one go near. s not their only place, is it? s the Lockholes, as they call Have they got any weapons? Whips, knives, and clubs, enough for their dirty work: that ve showed so far, But I dare say they ve shot one or two of our folk. There you are, Frodo!

t come at t let the ruffians come on their land. If they do, Tooks hunt Good for the Tooks! See you soon! ll bring you back an army of Tooks in the morning. All the same, t come just to talk things over. We ve got a plan. You make the arrangements. To Waymeet, that t trouble about them just yet. Who are you, and what d I was just going to ask you that, re not wanted. said the leader. We have met before, em have it!

Seems almost too easy after all, don time, Mr. Merry. s more to be done still, Why not now? s not much more than six o you know what s not too well, and not too bad, Sam, s in one of them new houses that the Chief d have had him with me, but that wasn ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I All right, Sam, Choose a lad or two, and go and fetch him to my house. You It all began with Pimple, as we call him, and it began as soon as you d already bought Sandyman d been selling a lot o t no smoke left, save for the Men; and the Chief didn s been plain ruination. Who is this Sharkey? I heard one of the ruffians speak of him. The biggest ruffian o ve never seen him, but he

dirty-looking Men to build a bigger one and fill it full o s got other mills like it. But you t no peace even at night in Hobbiton. And they pour out filth a purpose; they re going the right way about it. I don s behind all this. It Why, they even took Pimple “Sharkey,” says they. “So get out o ve took others we miss more, but there Good evening. Mr. Baggins! Glad indeed I am to see you safe back. But I speaking, if I may make so bold. You didn s what started all the mischief. And while you t make clear, they I am very sorry, Mr. Gamgee, But now I Well, you can said the gaffer. s behaved hisself and given satisfaction? Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee, Indeed, if you will believe it, he Sam blushed, but he looked gratefully at Frodo, for Rosie It takes a lot o said the gaffer, s come of his weskit? I don the ruffians were left up at Bag End,

s a big band about four miles away, re fire-raising as they come. Curse them! Ah! This lot won ll kill, if they can, If Tooks don d best get behind cover and shoot without arguing. There Well, you have walked into a trap,

Well, I suppose it is time now that we dealt with the “Chief”. Yes indeed; the sooner the better, ve cut it down! ve cut down the Party Tree! d gone off in one o you want to come back for? We So I see, ve a score to pay in this village, and don ll foot a bill too big for your purse. m a friend o s. But he t waste any more words on the fool, Sam! You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman, Save your breath! ve a better. Where is that miserable Lotho hiding? Shall we turn on the others to search the sheds? This is worse than Mordor! Yes, this is Mordor,

s get out! No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I am able to welcome you home. I did not, Well,” thought I, Well, if that is what you find pleasure in, t let him go! Kill him! He You have grown, Halfling,

t you, Worm? Will you tell them? Then I will, s red eyes. You do what Sharkey says, always, don t have seen it; but it And the very last end of the War, I hope, I hope so, ve cleared up the mess,

You would have done better to come with us after all, poor old Fredegar! s this young giant with the loud voice? Not little Pippin! What

s murder, and she would s an ill wind as blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All I wondered when you would think of it, What can I do with this? Throw it in the air on a breezy day and let it do its work! Choose one spot as a nursery, and see what happens to the plants there, Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,

Ah! that was proper fourteen-twenty, that was! It is gone for ever, and now all is dark and empty. When are you going to move in and join me, Sam? There is no need to come yet, if you don Well, what is it? s Rosie, Rose Cotton, It seems she didn t spoken, she couldn Well, you've wasted a year, so why wait longer?” t call it that.” Still I see what she means. I feel torn in two, as you might say.

s the matter, Mr. Frodo? I am wounded, wounded; it will never really heal. Well, Mr. Frodo, s not him , it t know what to do. I suppose you t have to cut it short before you can use it.” But if it re right again, Mr. Frodo! s what I wanted. It will be Bilbo So he will! s a marvel!

t go far or for a long time now, of course, Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo. Of course not. But never mind. You can see me on my way. Tell Rose that you won ll come back quite safe. I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and see Mr. Bilbo, And yet the only place I really want to be in is here. I am that torn in two. Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am afraid, Why, you have nearly finished it, Mr. Frodo! I have quite finished, Sam, The last pages are for you. If that isn It seems like a dream now.

Yes, I am coming, The Ring-bearers should go together. Where are you going, Master? To the Havens, Sam, And I can Come now, ride with me!

All is now ready. You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo. for it will be better to ride back three together

Ban of the Valar

Lord of the West

But great Kings take what is their right,

When Cirdan heard from Aranarth son of Arvedui of the king

Lord of the Coasts

until the King returns

Here is the ring of Barahir, So many have said, "Estel I was called," he said; "but I am Aragorn, Arathorn But she laughed merrily and said: "Then we are akin from afar. For I am Arwen Elrond Often is it seen,

Yet we have some part in that kinship, It is true, Then bitter will my days be, and I will walk in the wild alone, That will indeed be your fate, Can it be that my mother has spoken of this? What is that doom? That so long as I abide here, she shall live with the youth of the Eldar, and when I depart, she shall go with the, if she so chooses.

Would you then, lord, before your time leave your people that live by your word? Not before my time, I gave Hope to the Dunedain, I have kept no hope for myself.

Nay, dear lord, So it seems,

Léod was the name of Eorl

To one of these councils Freca rode with many men, and he asked the hand of Helm When the council was over, Helm stood up and laid his great hand on Freca The king does not permit brawls in his house, but men are freer outside Helm then proclaimed Freca

Soon after the winter broke. Then Fréaláf, son of Hild, Helm the Paths of the Dead

s Folk abandoned the Grey Mountains. Grór, Dáin s heir, with Borin his father Surely you do not think of returning to Erebor? Not at my age,

Drop it! Be off! Here s son, drove through the Orcs to the very threshold of Moria, crying

What? Yet another beggar at my doors? Must I brand you too? Good! We have the victory. Khazad-dûm is ours! s Folk said also: But surely my own kin will not desert me? s Folk walk again in Moria.

To the anvil,

That is strange, Thorin Oakenshield, Call them so, if you will, I will come, I grieved at the fall of Thorin,

grow out of stone

the Man of Skill the Grey Pilgrim

Take this ring, Master,

under the Mountain

Paths of the Dead

when they were still a wandering people, and though they had spring, summer, autumn, fading, winter, stirring

was also called lasse- lanta Reckoning of Rivendell but that has not happened in our time

on Friday the first on Friday the first of Summerfilth Winterfilth in the (muddy) Shire

, Eärenya (Oraearon ), after the Heavens

; (b) where the f -sound is related to or derived from a p , as in i- Pheriannath

), and also before r , as Andros tree-woven lands of Middle-earth

skill with foreign sounds , under the influence of the related dûn , and rhûn

