He could see nothing
but the wheeling stars, and away to his right vast shadows against the sky where the mountains of
the South marched past.

There had been the first ride at terrible speed without a halt, and then in the dawn he had seen
a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the silent town and the great empty house on the hill.
And hardly had they reached its shelter when the winged shadow had passed over once again, and
men wilted with fear.

Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling him of the customs of
Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built on the tops of outlying hills along both
borders of the great range, and maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in
readiness to bear his errand-riders to Rohan in the North, or to Belfalas in the South.

It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again, and chill grey mists were about them.

A dwarf out of the mountains in the North?

For ten leagues or more it ran from the mountains' feet and so back again, enclosing in its
fence the fields of the Pelennor: fair and fertile townlands on the long slopes and terraces falling to
the deep levels of the Anduin.

At its furthest point from the Great Gate of the City, north-eastward,
the wall was four leagues distant, and there from a frowning bank it overlooked the long flats beside
the river, and men had made it high and strong; for at that point, upon a walled causeway, the road
came in from the fords and bridges of Osgiliath and passed through a guarded gate between
embattled towers.

There Anduin, going in a wide knee about the hills of Emyn Arnen in
South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and the out-wall rose upon its very brink; and beneath it lay the
quays and landings of the Harlond for craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.

The townlands were rich, with wide tilth and many orchards, and homesteads there were with
oast and garner, fold and byre, and many rills rippling through the green from the highlands down to
Anduin.

Yet the herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part of the
people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the City, or in the high vales of the mountain-borders,
in Lossarnach, or further south in fair Lebennin with its five swift streams.

There dwelt a hardy folk
between the mountains and the sea.

They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood was
mingled, and there were short and swarthy folk among them whose sires came more from the
forgotten men who housed in the shadow of the hills in the Dark Years ere the coming of the kings.

But beyond, in the great fief of Belfalas, dwelt Prince Imrahil in his castle of Dol Amroth by the
sea, and he was of high blood, and his folk also, tall men and proud with sea-grey eyes.

To his left lay a sea of mist, rising to a bleak shadow in the East; but
to his right great mountains reared their heads, ranging from the West to a steep and sudden end, as
if in the making of the land the River had burst through a great barrier, carving out a mighty valley
to be a land of battle and debate in times to come.

And there where the White Mountains of Ered
Nimrais came to their end he saw, as Gandalf had promised, the dark mass of Mount Mindolluin,
the deep purple shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising day.

For the fashion of Minas Tirith was such that it was built on seven levels, each delved into the
hill, and about each was set a wall, and in each wall was a gate.

But the gates were not set in a line:
the Great Gate in the City Wall was at the east point of the circuit, but the next faced half south, and
the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the paved way that climbed towards the
Citadel turned first this way and then that across the face of the hill.

For partly in the primeval
shaping of the hill, partly by the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the
wide court behind the Gate a towering bastion of stone, its edge sharp as a ship-keel facing east.

Up
it rose, even to the level of the topmost circle, and there was crowned by a battlement; so that those
in the Citadel might, like mariners in a mountainous ship, look from its peak sheer down upon the
Gate seven hundred feet below.

A strong citadel it was indeed, and not to be taken by a host of enemies, if there were any
within that could hold weapons; unless some foe could come behind and scale the lower skirts of
Mindolluin, and so come upon the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain
mass.

But that shoulder, which rose to the height of the fifth wall, was hedged with great ramparts
right up to the precipice that overhung its western end; and in that space stood the houses and
domed tombs of bygone kings and lords, for ever silent between the mountain and the tower.

At last they came out of shadow to the seventh gate, and the warm sun that shone down
beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien, glowed here on the smooth walls and
rooted pillars, and the great arch with keystone carven in the likeness of a crowned and kingly head.

I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches
thirteen days ago, and the River brought it to me, broken: it will wind no more.'

After several turns they came to a house close to the wall of the citadel upon
the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the hill with the mountain.

I love beasts, and we see them seldom in this stony city; for my people came from the
mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien.

Away down
in the valley-bottom, five leagues or so as the eye leaps, the Great River could now be seen grey
and glittering, coming out of the north-west, and bending in a mighty sweep south and west again,
till it was lost to view in a haze and shimmer, far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away.

But most of the traffic went out along the chief highway,
and that turned south, and then bending swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from
sight.

'That is the road to the vales of Tumladen and Lossarnach, and the mountain-villages, and
then on to Lebennin,' said Beregond.

'I know of them,' said Pippin softly, 'but I will not speak of them now, so near, so near -' He
broke off and lifted his eyes above the River, and it seemed to him that all he could see was a vast
and threatening shadow.

Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged edges
softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a cloud-wall, and beyond that
again a yet deeper gloom.

But however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad,
beyond the River on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings.

He looked at the great walls, and the towers and brave banners, and the
sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom in the East; and he thought of the long fingers
of that Shadow: of the orcs in the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard, the birds of
evil eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire – and of the winged terror, the Nazgûl.

Not though the walls be taken by a
reckless foe that will build a hill of carrion before them.

There are still other fastnesses, and secret
ways of escape into the mountains.

We cannot assault the
mountains of – of yonder realm.

From the Anfalas, the
Langstrand far away, a long line of men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little
villages, scantily equipped save for the household of Golasgil their lord.

From Lamedon, a few grim
hillmen without a captain.

Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath Gelin with three hundreds of gallant green-clad
men.

Since the coming of the
winged shadow, he desires to return to the hills under cover of night.'
'And then whither?' said Legolas.

And there are caves, Merry, caves of
wonder!

'I have had a good hill-pony made ready for you.

For I will ride from the Burg by mountain

paths, not by the plain, and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady Éowyn awaits
me.

This parting grieves me, and my strength is lessened by it; but
now I must take the mountain-roads and delay no longer.

They rode over the Dike and down the Coomb, and then, turning swiftly
eastwards, they took a path that skirted the foothills for a mile or so, until bending south it passed
back among the hills and disappeared from view.

'But there is only one way
through the mountains that will bring me to the coastlands before all is lost.

The Dead awaken;
for the hour is come for the oathbreakers;
at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again
and hear there a horn in the hills ringing.

For at Erech there
stands yet a black stone that was brought, it was said, from Númenor by Isildur; and it was set upon
a hill, and upon it the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to him in the beginning of the realm
of Gondor.

But when Sauron returned and grew in might again, Isildur summoned the Men of the
Mountains to fulfil their oath, and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark
Years.
'Then Isildur said to their king: “Thou shalt be the last king.

And they fled before the wrath of Isildur, and did not dare to go forth to war on Sauron's
part; and they hid themselves in secret places in the mountains and had no dealings with other men,
but slowly dwindled in the barren hills.

And the terror of the Sleepless Dead lies about the Hill of
Erech and all places where that people lingered.

And while Théoden went by slow paths in the hills, the Grey Company passed swiftly over
the plain, and on the next day in the afternoon they came to Edoras; and there they halted only
briefly,

For I am weary of
skulking in the hills, and wish to face peril and battle.'
'Your duty is with your people,' he answered.

But Éowyn stood still as a figure carven in stone, her hands clenched at her sides, and she
watched them until they passed into the shadows under the black Dwimorberg, the Haunted
Mountain, in which was the Gate of the Dead.

The light was still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed over the black ridges of
the Haunted Mountain before them.

There under the gloom of black trees that not even
Legolas could long endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root, and right in
their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom.

'My blood runs chill,' said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his voice fell dead on the
dank fir-needles at his feet.

'In any other cave Gimli Glóin's son would have
been the first to run to the gleam of gold.

He had been clad in mail, and still his harness lay there
whole; for the cavern's air was as dry as dust, and his hauberk was gilded.

He had
fallen near the far wall of the cave, as now could be seen, and before him stood a stony door closed
fast: his finger-bones were still clawing at the cracks.

There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than the whispers before;
and then a chill blast came in which the torches flickered and went out, and could not be rekindled.

'Where in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered: 'We have descended from
the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that flows at last to the sea that washes the walls of
Dol Amroth.

The Morthond Vale made a great bay that beat up against the sheer southern faces of the
mountains.

So without looking back they rode the mountain-fields, until they came to a bridge over
the growing torrent and found a road that went down into the land.

And
thus, just ere midnight, and in a darkness as black as the caverns in the mountains, they came at last
to the Hill of Erech.

Long had the terror of the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty fields about it.

Then Elrohir gave to
Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and it seemed to those that stood near that they heard a
sound of answering horns, as if it was an echo in deep caves far away.

No other sound they heard,
and yet they were aware of a great host gathered all about the hill on which they stood; and a chill
wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains.

The township and the fords of Ciril they
found deserted, for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to the hills at the
rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead.

And even as Pippin stood at the Great Gate of the City and saw the Prince of Dol
Amroth ride in with his banners, the King of Rohan came down out of the hills.

Darkness had already crept beneath the murmuring fir-woods that clothed the steep
mountain-sides.

There the white Snowbourn, joined by the lesser stream, went rushing,
fuming on the stones, down to Edoras and the green hills and the plains.

He loved
mountains, or he had loved the thought of them marching on the edge of stories brought from far
away; but now he was borne down by the insupportable weight of Middle-earth.

A single small light could be seen twinkling by the river.

If the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills?

Other horns answered it, and
lights shone out across the river.

So the King of the Mark came back victorious out of the West to Dunharrow beneath the feet
of the White Mountains.

Then it was that Gandalf counselled us not to assemble in the fields, but to meet you here in
the valley under the mountains.

Flats and meads of rough grass, grey now in the falling night, lay all about, but
in front on the far side of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier of the great roots of the
Starkhorn, cloven by the river in ages past.

Now all the great assembly was
falling into shadow, and yet, though the night-chill blew cold from the heights no lanterns glowed,
no fires were lit.

The Firienfeld
men called it, a green mountain-field of grass and heath, high above the deep-delved courses of the
Snowbourn, laid upon the lap of the great mountains behind: the Starkhorn southwards, and
northwards the saw-toothed mass of Irensaga, between which there faced the riders, the grim black
wall of the Dwimorberg, the Haunted Mountain rising out of steep slopes of sombre pines.

For what purpose they had made this place, as a town or secret
temple or a tomb of kings, none could say.

'Is he still here?'
'No, he is gone,' said Éowyn turning away and looking at the mountains dark against the East
and South.

He came at night, and rode away yestermorn, ere the Sun had
climbed over the mountain-tops.

Night came
on, and the half-seen heads of the mountains westward were crowned with stars, but the East was
dark and blank.

If these old tales speak true that have come down from father to son in the House of Eorl,
then the Door under Dwimorberg leads to a secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some
forgotten end.

Whence they came none knew, but they went up
the stony road and vanished into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.'
'Then why has Aragorn gone that way?' asked Merry.

For the old man died
in that hour and fell upon his face; and no other tidings of the ancient dwellers in the mountains
have our folk ever learned.

For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be
decided, and if the tide be not stemmed there, then it will flow over all the fair fields of Rohan, and
even in this Hold among the hills there shall be no refuge.'
'Dark tidings,' said Théoden, 'yet not all unguessed.

So great a power as the Dark Lord seems now to wield might well contain us in
battle before the City and yet strike with great force across the River away beyond the Gate of
Kings.

From the hills in the
Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise and creep across the sky, and all night as I rode it came behind
eating up the stars.

Now the great cloud hangs over all the land between here and the Mountains of
Shadow; and it is deepening.

There on the wide flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many companies well nigh
five and fifty hundreds of Riders fully armed, and many hundreds of other men with spare horses
lightly burdened.

And then on again through the Folde; and
through the Fenmarch, where to their right great oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the hills under
the shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but away to their left the mists lay on the
marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash.

And so King Théoden departed from his own realm, and mile by mile the long road wound
away, and the beacon hills marched past:

This is some device of his malice; some
broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he sends to darken hearts and counsel.

But now, who knows if
he will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?'
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'Gandalf, too, is anxious.

The Pelennor lay dim
beneath him, fading away to the scarce guessed line of the Great River.

Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle in the River northward which we hold in
defence; and horses are kept on the hither bank.

And the Enemy must pay dearly for the crossing of the River.

That he cannot
do, in force to assail the City, either north of Cair Andros because of the marshes, or southwards
towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats.

But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor unfought – not if there is a captain here who
has still the courage to do his lord's will.'

'And we have learned,' said the messenger, 'that
the Black Captain leads them once again, and the fear of him has passed before him over the River.'

Then from many points little
rivers of red flame came hurrying on, winding through the gloom, converging towards the line of
the broad road that led from the City-gate to Osgiliath.

They were the remnant of the guard
that was kept at that point where the way from Anórien and Rohan ran into the townlands: Ingold
led them, the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin less than five days before, while the sun
still rose and there was hope in the morning.

The new host that we had tidings of has come first, from over the River by way of

Andros, it is said.

The numbers that had already passed over the River could not be guessed in the darkness, but when
morning, or its dim shadow, stole over the plain, it was seen that even fear by night had scarcely
over-counted them.

But marred and dishonoured as they were, it often chanced that thus a man would see again the
face of someone that he had known, who had walked proudly once in arms, or tilled the fields, or
ridden in upon a holiday from the green vales in the hills.

Mean folk shall rule the last remnant of the Kings of Men, lurking
in the hills until all are hounded out.'

Far behind the battle the River had been swiftly bridged, and all day more force and gear of
war had poured across.

Great engines crawled across the field; and in the
midst was a huge ram, great as a forest-tree a hundred feet in length, swinging on mighty chains.

Great beasts drew it, Orcs surrounded it, and
behind walked mountain-trolls to wield it.

Over the hills of slain a hideous shape appeared:
a horseman, tall, hooded, cloaked in black.

Then he heard it again: a sound like faint drums in the wooded hills and mountain -steps.

The host was bivouacked in the pine-woods that clustered about Eilenach
Beacon, a tall hill standing up from the long ridges of the Druadan Forest that lay beside the great

road in East Anórien.

They were less than a day's ride from the out-walls of Minas
Tirith that encircled the townlands.

Orcs were roving in the hills and woods
along the roadside.

I began to think I
was imagining them, as no one else seemed to take any notice of them.'
'Nay, nay,' said Elfhelm, 'the enemy is on the road not in the hills.

They still haunt Druadan Forest, it is
said.

'We look out from hills.

We climb big mountain and look
down.

They carved hills as hunters carve beast-flesh.

Over hill and behind hill it lies still under grass and
tree, there behind Rimmon and down to Dîn, and back at the end to Horse-men's road.

ere it can be set in order when we issue from the hills.

Already she climbs over East-mountains.

The Wild Men had put out a screen of wary hunters, so that no orc or roving spy should learn of the
movements in the hills.

It was late
in the afternoon when the leaders came to wide grey thickets stretching beyond the eastward side of
Amon Dîn, and masking a great gap in the line of hills that from Nardol to Din ran east and west.

But the thickets offered to
the Riders their last hope of cover before they went into open battle; for beyond them lay the road
and the plains of Anduin, while east and southwards the slopes were bare and rocky, as the writhen
hills gathered themselves together and climbed up, bastion upon bastion, into the great mass and
shoulders of Mindolluin.

ere we reach the wall of the townlands.

Far away and almost straight ahead there
was a red glow under the black sky and the sides of the great mountain loomed dark against it.

Perhaps Théoden would quail, bow his old head, turn, slink away to hide in the hills.

And straightway all the horns in the host were lifted up in music, and
the blowing of the horns of Rohan in that hour was like a storm upon the plain and a thunder in the
mountains.

Théoden King of the Mark had reached the road from the Gate to the River, and he turned
towards the City that was now less than a mile distant.

Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun, and there camps were blazing, orcs
were flying towards the River like herds before the hunters; and the Rohirrim went hither and
thither at their will.

Fewer were they but they clove through the Southrons like a fire-bolt in a forest.

A creature of an older
world maybe it was, whose kind, fingering in forgotten mountains cold beneath the Moon,
outstayed their day, and in hideous eyrie bred this last untimely brood, apt to evil.

New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River; and from under the walls
came the legions of Morgul; and from the southward fields came footmen of Harad with horsemen
before them, and behind them rose the huge backs of the mumakil with war-towers upon them.

He was weary and full of pain, and his limbs trembled as with a chill.

Hurin the Tall Warden of the
Keys, and the Lord of Lossarnach, and Hirluin of the Green Hills, and Prince Imrahil the fair with
his knights all about him.
Not too soon came their aid to the Rohirrim; for fortune had turned against Éomer, and his
fury had betrayed him.

Now he looked to the River, and hope died in his heart, and the wind that he had
blessed he now called accursed.

So he rode to a green hillock
and there set his banner, and the White Horse ran rippling in the wind.

And
so in this place and that, by burned homestead or barn, upon hillock or mound, under wall or on
field, still they gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away.

Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with a great burning, so that
the hills and the mountains were dyed as with blood; fire glowed in the River, and the grass of the
Pelennor lay red in the nightfall.

All were slain save those who fled
to die, or to drown in the red foam of the River.

We heard of the horns in the hills ringing,
the swords shining in the South-kingdom.

Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea,
nor Forlong the old to the flowering vales
ever, to Arnach, to his own country
returned in triumph; nor the tall bowmen,
Derufin and Duilin, to their dark waters,
meres of Morthond under mountain-shadows.

Long now they sleep
under grass in Gondor by the Great River.

Grey now as tears, gleaming silver,
red then it rolled, roaring water:
foam dyed with blood flamed at sunset;
as beacons mountains burned at evening;
red fell the dew in Rammas Echor.

'All
I hope is that those murdering devils do not come to this House and trouble the sick.'
Then Gandalf went out in haste, and already the fire in the sky was burning out, and the
smouldering hills were fading, while ash-grey evening crept over the fields.

Then, whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten power of Westernesse, or whether it was
but his words of the Lady Éowyn that wrought on them, as the sweet influence of the herb stole
about the chamber it seemed to those who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and
it bore no scent, but was an air wholly fresh and clean and young, as if it had not before been
breathed by any living thing and came new-made from snowy mountains high beneath a dome of
stars, or from shores of silver far away washed by seas of foam.

I had some of Saruman's best in my pack, but what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don't
know.'
'Master Meriadoc,' said Aragorn, 'if you think that I have passed through the mountains and
the realm of Gondor with fire and sword to bring herbs to a careless soldier who throws away his
gear, you are mistaken.

When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer
him the service of stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.'
'They need more gardens,' said Legolas.

And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out against the sun, and as
he gazed he saw white sea-birds beating up the River.

Swiftly then he told of the haunted road under the mountains, and the dark tryst at Erech, and
the great ride thence, ninety leagues and three, to Pelargir on Anduin.

And
there men of Lamedon contested the fords with fell folk of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the
river.

And over the wide land, trampling unheeded the grass and the flowers, we
hunted our foes through a day and a night, until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last.

Many of those that we pursued had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them;
and some of the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River or to reach the far shore; and
many of the smaller craft were ablaze.

“Yet to the
Harlond we must come tomorrow or fail utterly.”
'The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they laboured; yet slowly we passed
up the Great River, for we strove against its stream, and though that is not swift down in the South,
we had no help of wind.

Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for the
honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'
'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love of the Lord of the White
Tree.'

Victory cannot be achieved by arms,
whether you sit here to endure siege after siege, or march out to be overwhelmed beyond the River.

You have only a choice of evils; and prudence would counsel you to strengthen such strong places
as you have, and there await the onset; for so shall the time before your end be made a little longer.'
'Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol Amroth, or to Dunharrow, and there
sit like children on sand-castles when the tide is flowing?' said Imrahil.

Moreover many were
bidden to follow me up the River in any craft they could gather; and with this wind they will soon
be at hand, indeed several ships have already come to the Harlond.

I judge that we could lead out
seven thousands of horse and foot, and yet leave the City in better defence than it was when the
assault began.'

'The Gate is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill to rebuild it and set it up
anew?'
'In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dain there is such skill,' said Aragorn, 'and if all our hopes do
not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Glóin's son to ask for wrights of the Mountain.

'Surely,' he cried, 'this is the greatest jest in all the history of Gondor: that we should ride with
seven thousands, scarce as many as the vanguard of its army in the days of its power, to assail the
mountains and the impenetrable gate of the Black Land!

Sam was looking at Orodruin, the Mountain of Fire.

Ever and anon the furnaces far below its
ashen cone would grow hot and with a great surging and throbbing pour forth rivers of molten rock
from chasms in its sides.

Its eastern face stood up in three great tiers from a shelf in the mountain-wall far below; its
back was to a great cliff behind, from which it jutted out in pointed bastions, one above the other,
diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of cunning masonry that looked north-east and south-east.

A wide and echoing passage led back from the door towards the mountain-side.

Eastward Sam could see the plain of Mordor
vast and dark below, and the burning mountain far away.

A fresh turmoil was surging in its deep
wells, and the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many miles the light of
them lit the tower-top with a red glare.

Westward the view was blocked by the base of the great
turret that stood at the back of this upper court and reared its horn high above the crest of the
encircling hills.

Though here at journey's end I lie
in darkness buried deep,
beyond all towers strong and high,
beyond all mountains steep,
above all shadows rides the Sun
and Stars for ever dwell:
I will not say the Day is done,
nor bid the Stars farewell.

You up there, you dunghill rat!

'But you're in the land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out,
you'll see the Fiery Mountain and all.

The stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare
of the Mountain could still be seen, though it was dying down now to a sullen red.

Away
behind them, now high above on the mountain-side, loomed the Tower of Cirith Ungol, its stones
glowing dully.

The
Mountain smouldered and its fires went out.

But I have to go
on trying to get to the Mountain, as long as I can move.

'It's gone cold, or else I've caught a chill.'
'You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam.

As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all along the line of the Ephel
Duath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a great speed out of the West, at first only a black
speck against the glimmering strip above the mountain-tops, but growing, until it plunged like a bolt
into the dark canopy and passed high above them.

'That's away beyond the mountains.

The light, though no more than a grey dusk, was now enough for them
to see that they were deep in the valley between the mountains.

The river-bed was now some way below the path.

Upon its outer marges under the westward mountains Mordor was
a dying land, but it was not yet dead.

There, peeping among the
cloud-wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for a while.

Behind it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as a thunder-cloud, the veils of Barad-dur that was
reared far way upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains thrust down from the North.

Between them
and the smoking mountain, and about it north and south, all seemed ruinous and dead, a desert
burned and choked.

As far as their eyes could reach, along the skirts of the Morgai and

away southward, there were camps, some of tents, some ordered like small towns.

Neither he nor Frodo knew anything of the great slave-worked fields away south in this wide
realm, beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark sad waters of Lake Nurnen; nor of the great
roads that ran away east and south to tributary lands, from which the soldiers of the Tower brought
long waggon-trains of goods and booty and fresh slaves.

And if it had also been its purpose to defend the Mountain against all approach, it could
scarcely have done more.

After a mile or
more they saw, huddled in a hollow at the cliff's foot, the orc-hold that they had guessed was near at
hand: a wall and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark mouth of a cave.

It went
up into the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.'
'Not much use are you, you little snufflers?' said the big orc.

But of course, if we get there, we shall be
further than we were from the Mountain, sixty miles from it, I should think.

Even if all goes well, I could hardly reach the
Mountain in a week.

The trough between the mountains and the Morgai
had steadily dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more than a shelf in
the steep faces of the Ephel Duath; but to the east it fell as sheerly as ever down into Gorgoroth.

A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched away from the main
range, stood the old castle of Durthang, now one of the many orc-holds that clustered about the dale
of Udun.

Clambering a few steps up he found a tiny stream of dark water that came out
from the hill-side and filled a little bare pool, from which again it spilled, and vanished then under
the barren stones.

Then suddenly one of the slave-drivers spied the two figures by the
road-side.

the slave-driver shouted.

There was no hope of falling out unseen: Now and again
the orc-driver fell back and jeered at them.

Though the drivers yelled and plied their whips, scuffles broke out and some
blades were drawn.

They slept a little in uneasy fits; for their
sweat grew chill on them, and the hard stones bit them, and they shivered.

In the morning a grey light came again, for in the high regions the West Wind still blew, but
down on the stones behind the fences of the Black Land the air seemed almost dead, chill and yet
stifling.

South-eastward, far off like a dark standing
shadow, loomed the Mountain.

A few miles to the north-east the foothills of the Ashen Mountains stood like sombre grey ghosts,
behind which the misty northern heights rose like a line of distant cloud hardly darker than the
lowering sky.

It looks every step
of fifty miles,' he muttered gloomily staring at the threatening mountain, 'and that'll take a week, if
it takes a day, with Mr. Frodo as he is.'

Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind such cover as they

could find, but moving always in a slant towards the foothills of the northern range.

But as they
went the most easterly of the roads followed them, until it ran off, hugging the skirts of the
mountains, away into a wall of black shadow far ahead.

They could not follow this road any longer; for it went on eastward
into the great Shadow, but the Mountain now loomed upon their right, almost due south, and they
must turn towards it.

Such daylight as followed was dim; for here
as the Mountain drew near the air was ever mirky, while out from the Dark Tower there crept the
veils of Shadow that Sauron wove about himself.

As if roused by a sudden bell, Frodo rose quickly, and stood up and looked away southwards;
but when his eyes beheld the Mountain and the desert he quailed again.

He pointed to the Mountain.

Frodo looked again towards the Mountain.

Now at last they turned their faces to the Mountain and set out, thinking no more of
concealment, bending their weariness and failing wills only to the one task of going on.

The land was rough and hostile, and yet they made much
progress, and ever the Mountain drew nearer.

The way back, if there is
one, goes past the Mountain.'

And you can't go on much longer giving him all the water and most of
the food.'
'I can go on a good way though, and I will.'
'Where to?'
'To the Mountain, of course.'

The Mountain too slept uneasily.

It remained dark, not only because of the smokes of the Mountain: there
seemed to be a storm coming up, and away to the south-east there was a shimmer of lightnings
under the black skies.

The Mountain crept up ever nearer, until, if they lifted their heavy heads, it filled all their
sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass of ash and slag and burned stone, out of which a
sheer-sided cone was raised into the clouds.

They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little to the westward; there
its long grey slopes, though broken, were not sheer.

The Mountain standing ominous and alone had looked taller than it was.

It climbed like a rising girdle from the west and wound snakelike
about the Mountain, until before it went round out of view it reached the foot of the cone upon its
eastern side.

They might conquer the
Mountain yet.

Out from the Dark
Tower's huge western gate it came over a deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron, and then passing into
the plain it ran for a league between two smoking chasms, and so reached a long sloping causeway
that led up on to the Mountain's eastern side.

Often blocked or destroyed by the tumults of the Mountain's furnaces, always that road was
repaired and cleaned again by the labours of countless orcs.

There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone
once long ago vomited from the Mountain's furnaces.

Soon it bent again and with a last eastward course passed in a cutting
along the face of the cone and came to the dark door in the Mountain's side, the door of the
Sammath Naur.

Far away now rising towards the South the sun, piercing the smokes and haze,
burned ominous, a dull bleared disc of red; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain like a dead land,

silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke.

Then Sam saw that he was in a long cave or tunnel that bored into the Mountain's smoking
cone.

The whole mind and purpose of the Power that wielded them was now bent with overwhelming
force upon the Mountain.

The fires below awoke in anger, the red light blazed, and all the cavern was filled with a great
glare and heat.

The
throbbing grew to a great tumult, and the Mountain shook.

A brief vision he had of swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers and battlements, tall as
hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above immeasurable pits; great courts and dungeons,
eyeless prisons sheer as cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant: and then all passed.

Towers
fell and mountains slid; walls crumbled and melted, crashing down; vast spires of smoke and
spouting steams went billowing up, up, until they toppled like an overwhelming wave, and its wild
crest curled and came foaming down upon the land.

And into the heart of the storm, with
a cry that pierced all other sounds, tearing the clouds asunder, the Nazgûl came, shooting like
flaming bolts, as caught in the fiery ruin of hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out.

Here at the end of all things, Sam.'

Chapter 4
The Field of Cormallen
All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged.

Upon the hill-top stood Gandalf, and he was white and cold and no shadow fell on him.

The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on the beleaguered hills, voices roaring like a tide amid
the wreck and crash of arms.

There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of all the Eagles of the
North, mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor, who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks
of the Encircling Mountains when Middle-earth was young.

Behind them in long swift lines came
all their vassals from the northern mountains, speeding on a gathering wind.

Out from the beleaguered hills knights of Gondor, Riders of Rohan,
Dunedain of the North, close-serried companies, drove against their wavering foes, piercing the
press with the thrust of bitter spears.

Then rising swiftly up, far above the
Towers of the Black Gate, high above the mountains, a vast soaring darkness sprang into the sky,
flickering with fire.

As when death smites the
swollen brooding thing that inhabits their crawling hill and holds them all in sway, ants will wander
witless and purposeless and then feebly die, so the creatures of Sauron, orc or troll or beast
spell-enslaved, ran hither and thither mindless; and some slew themselves, or cast themselves in
pits, or fled wailing back to hide in holes and dark lightless places far from hope.

Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn and the other lords,
stood upon the hill-top and called; and down to him came the great eagle, Gwaihir the Windlord,
and stood before him.

If you wish to go, I'll come,' said Frodo; and they rose and went slowly down
the winding road; and even as they passed towards the Mountain's quaking feet, a great smoke and
steam belched from the Sammath Naur, and the side of the cone was riven open, and a huge fiery
vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side.

They had reached a low ashen hill piled at the Mountain's foot; but from it there was no more
escape.

Behind them the Mountain
was convulsed.

Slow rivers of fire came down the long slopes
towards them.

And so it was that Gwaihir saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes, as down the wild wind he
came, and daring the great peril of the skies he circled in the air: two small dark figures, forlorn,
hand in hand upon a little hill, while the world shook under them, and gasped, and rivers of fire
drew near.

So they came to a wide green land, and beyond it was a broad river in a silver haze,
out of which rose a long wooded isle, and many ships lay by its shores.

Orcs, and talking trees, and leagues of grass, and galloping riders, and glittering caves, and
white towers and golden halls, and battles, and tall ships sailing, all these passed before Sam's mind
until he felt bewildered.

Nor shall I forget finding you on the hill
of the last battle.

Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling,
Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,
In Eressea, in Elvenhome that no man can discover,
Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!'
And so singing Legolas went away down the hill.

After the host left Morgul Vale and took the
northward road beneath the shadow of the mountains no messenger had returned nor any rumour of
what was passing in the brooding East.

In the valleys of our hills there are
flowers fair and bright, and maidens fairer still; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in
Gondor so lovely, and so sorrowful.

Then presently it seemed to them that above the ridges of the distant
mountains another vast mountain of darkness rose, towering up like a wave that should engulf the
world, and about it lightnings flickered; and then a tremor ran through the earth, and they felt the
walls of the City quiver.

'Yes,' said Faramir, 'of the land of Westernesse that foundered and of the great dark wave
climbing over the green lands and above the hills, and coming on, darkness unescapable.

And if she will, then let us cross the River and in happier

days let us dwell in fair Ithilien and there make a garden.

And when the sun rose in the clear
morning above the mountains in the East, upon which shadows lay no more, then all the bells rang,
and all the banners broke and flowed in the wind; and upon the White Tower of the citadel the
standard of the Stewards, bright argent like snow in the sun, bearing no charge nor device, was
raised over Gondor for the last time.

In his time the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in the days of its first
glory; and it was filled with trees and with fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril and
steel, and its streets were paved with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in it, and
the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made good, and the houses
were filled with men and women and the laughter of children, and no window was blind nor any
courtyard empty; and after the ending of the Third Age of the world into the new age it preserved
the memory and the glory of the years that were gone.

And Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to be his
princedom, and bade him dwell in the hills of Emyn Arnen within sight of the City.

For it led up on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had been wont
to go.

And standing there
they surveyed the lands, for the morning was come; and they saw the towers of the City far below
them like white pencils touched by the sunlight, and all the Vale of Anduin was like a garden, and
the Mountains of Shadow were veiled in a golden mist.

Upon the one side their sight reached to the
grey Emyn Muil, and the glint of Rauros was like a star twinkling far off; and upon the other side
they saw the River like a ribbon laid down to Pelargir, and beyond that was a light on the hem of the
sky that spoke of the Sea.

Here it has lain, hidden
on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil lay hidden in the wastes of the North.

Without haste and at peace they passed into Anórien, and they came to the Grey Wood under
Amon Dín; and there they heard a sound as of drums beating in the hills, though no living thing
could be seen.

The Forest of Druadan he gives to Ghan-buri-ghan and to
his folk, to be their own for ever; and hereafter let no man enter it without their leave!'

The slow voices of the Riders stirred the hearts even of those who did not know the
speech of that people; but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of the Mark
as they heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and the voice of Eorl crying above
the battle upon the Field of Celebrant; and the tale of the kings rolled on, and the horn of Helm was
loud in the mountains, until the Darkness came and King Théoden arose and rode through the
Shadow to the fire, and died in splendour, even as the Sun, returning beyond hope, gleamed upon
Mindolluin in the morning.

None
saw her last meeting with Elrond her father, for they went up into the hills and there spoke long
together, and bitter was their parting that should endure beyond the ends of the world.

Then
Legolas repaid his promise to Gimli and went with him to the Glittering Caves; and when they

returned he was silent, and would say only that Gimli alone could find fit words to speak of them.

For there was a
great inrush of those, burarum , those evileyed – blackhanded – bowlegged – flinthearted –
clawfingered – foulbellied – bloodthirsty, morimaite – sincahonda , hoom , well, since you are hasty
folk and their full name is as long as years of torment, those vermin of orcs; and they came over the
River and down from the North and all round the wood of Laurelindórenan, which they could not
get into, thanks to the Great ones who are here.'

And not many will
remember us, for not many escaped us alive, and the River had most of those.

May your forest grow again in peace.

When this valley is filled there is room and
to spare west of the mountains, where once you walked long ago.'

'Forests may grow,' he said.

And maybe there
are some that would be pleased to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?'

On the sixth day since their parting from the King they journeyed through a wood climbing
down from the hills at the feet of the Misty Mountains that now marched on their right hand.

September came in with golden days and silver nights, and they rode at
ease until they reached the Swanfleet river, and found the old ford, east of the falls where it went
down suddenly into the lowlands.

So they passed into Eregion, and at last a fair morning dawned, shimmering above gleaming
mists; and looking from their camp on a low hill the travellers saw away in the east the Sun
catching three peaks that thrust up into the sky through floating clouds: Caradhras, Celebdil, and
Fanuidhol.

Quickly fading into the stones and the shadows the grey-cloaked people of
Lórien rode towards the mountains; and those who were going to Rivendell sat on the hill and
watched, until there came out of the gathering mist a flash; and then they saw no more.

There's something of everything here, if you understand me: the Shire and the
Golden Wood and Gondor and kings' houses and inns and meadows and mountains all mixed.

But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of other things
seem to have got mixed up with it: Aragorn's affairs, and the White Council and Gondor, and the
Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts – did you really see one, Sam? – and caves and towers
and golden trees, and goodness knows what besides.

At length they came to Weathertop; and it
was then drawing towards evening and the shadow of the hill lay dark on the road.

Then Frodo
begged them to hasten, and he would not look towards the hill, but rode through its shadow with
head bowed and cloak drawn close about him.

That night the weather changed, and a wind came

from the West laden with rain, and it blew loud and chill, and the yellow leaves whirled like birds in
the air.

When they came to the Chetwood already the boughs were almost bare, and a great curtain
of rain veiled Bree Hill from their sight.

'You don't say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill?

'There was poor Mat
Heathertoes, and Rowlie Appledore, and little Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and Willie Banks
from up-away, and one of the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed.

'Though I'm sure I don't know why he should,
sitting in his big chair up in his great castle, hundreds of miles away.

But there was no sign of him; and there was a grey mist on the Barrow-downs southwards, and a
deep veil over the Old Forest far away.

At either end of the Bridge there was a great spiked gate; and on the
further side of the river they could see that some new houses had been built: two-storeyed with
narrow straight-sided windows, bare and dimly lit, all very gloomy and un-Shirelike.

Lost in the Old Forest by all accounts.

As evening fell they were drawing near to Frogmorton, a village right on the Road, about
twenty-two miles from the Bridge.

But as they came to the east end of the village they met a barrier with a
large board saying no road; and behind it stood a large band of Shirriffs with staves in their hands
and feathers in their caps, looking both important and rather scared.

There's a Shirriff-house at the far end of the
village.

It was rather a comic cavalcade that left the village, though the few folk that came out to stare
at the 'get-up' of the travellers did not seem quite sure whether laughing was allowed.

The sun came out, and in spite of the chilly wind they were soon
puffing and sweating.

But in the village of Bywater all the houses and holes were shut, and no one greeted them.

It chilled them with fear.

'If you trouble this village again, you will regret it.'

They rode back to the middle of the village.

Far over hill and field it echoed; and so compelling was that call that Sam
himself almost turned and dashed back.

Then he and his sons ran off towards the village.

When Sam got back he found the whole village roused.

Some of the village-folk had lit a large fire, just to enliven things, and also because it was one
of the things forbidden by the Chief.

Others at Merry's orders
were setting up barriers across the road at each end of the village.

Tooks are lucky, they've got those
deep holes in the Green Hills, the Great Smials and all, and the ruffians can't come at 'em; and they
won't let the ruffians come on their land.

You'll
not have need to go near the old Hobbiton village over Water.

Merry arranged for look-outs round the village and guards at the barriers
during the night.

And while you're been
trapessing in foreign parts, chasing Black Men up mountains from what my Sam says, though what
for he don't make clear, they've been and dug up Bagshot Row and ruined my taters!'
'I am very sorry, Mr. Gamgee,' said Frodo.

'Indeed, if you will believe it, he's now one of
the most famous people in all the lands, and they are making songs about his deeds from here to the
Sea and beyond the Great River.'

Before long they marched in, a hundred strong, from
Tuckborough and the Green Hills with Pippin at their head.

The fallen hobbits were laid together in a grave on the hill-side, where later a
great stone was set up with a garden about it.

The great chimney rose up before them; and as
they drew near the old village across the Water, through rows of new mean houses along each side
of the road, they saw the new mill in all its frowning and dirty ugliness: a great brick building
straddling the stream, which it fouled with a steaming and stinking overflow.

As they crossed the bridge and looked up the Hill they gasped.

But see here, Master
Sandyman, I've a score to pay in this village, and don't you make it any longer with your jeering, or
you'll foot a bill too big for your purse.'

We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious Boss.

Then lifting up his silver horn he winded it,
and its clear call rang over the Hill; and out of the holes and sheds and shabby houses of Hobbiton
the hobbits answered, and came pouring out, and with cheers and loud cries they followed the
company up the road to Bag End.

The hobbits of the villages had seen Saruman come out of one of the huts, and at once they
came crowding up to the door of Bag End.

To the dismay of those that stood by, about the body of Saruman a grey mist gathered, and
rising slowly to a great height like smoke from a fire, as a pale shrouded figure it loomed over the
Hill.

He had been taken when
the ruffians smoked out a band of rebels that he led from their hidings up in the Brockenbores by
the hills of Scary.

One of the first things done in Hobbiton, before even the removal of the new mill, was the
clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the restoration of Bagshot Row.

The front of the new sand -pit
was all levelled and made into a large sheltered garden, and new holes were dug in the southward
face, back into the Hill, and they were lined with brick.

In after years, as it grew in grace and beauty,
it was known far and wide and people would come long journeys to see it: the only mallorn west of
the Mountains and east of the Sea, and one of the finest in the world.

In addition to all his other labours he was busy directing the cleaning up and restoring of
Bag End; but he was often away in the Shire on his forestry work.

They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End, and they let their
ponies walk at their leisure.

They camped in the Green Hills, and on September the twenty-second
they rode gently down into the beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away.
'If that isn't the very tree you hid behind when the Black Rider first showed up, Mr. Frodo!'
said Sam pointing to the left.

It was evening, and the stars were glimmering in the eastern sky as they passed the ruined oak
and turned and went on down the hill between the hazel-thickets.

But Sam turned to Bywater, and so
came back up the Hill, as day was ending once more.

There was a tall mountain in the midst of the land, the Meneltarma, and from its summit the
farsighted could descry the white tower of the Haven of the Eldar in Eressea.

(iii) Eriador, Arnor and the heirs of Isildur
'Eriador was of old the name of all the lands between the Misty Mountains and the Blue; in
the South it was bounded by the Greyflood and the Glanduin that flows into it above Tharbad.

Beyond the Lune was Elvish
country, green and quiet, where no Men went; but Dwarves dwelt, and still dwell, in the east side of
the Blue Mountains, especially in those parts south of the Gulf of Lune, where they have mines that
are still in use.

Arthedain was in the North-west and included the land between Brandywine and Lune, and also the
land north of the Great Road as far as the Weather Hills.

Rhudaur was in the North-east and lay
between the Ettenmoors, the Weather Hills, and the Misty Mountains, but included also the Angle
between the Hoarwell and the Loudwater.

The chief matter of debate was the possession of the Weather Hills and the land
westward towards Bree.

Its lands lay on both sides
of the Mountains, and there were gathered many evil men, and Orcs, and other fell creatures.

There the Dunedain were few, and power had been seized by an evil lord of the Hill -men,
who was in secret league with Angmar.

Argeleb therefore fortified the Weather Hills; 1

Arveleg son of Argeleb, with the help of Cardolan and Lindon, drove back his enemies from
the Hills; and for many years Arthedain and Cardolan held in force a frontier along the Weather
Hills, the Great Road, and the lower Hoarwell.

A great host came out of Angmar in 1409, and crossing the river entered Cardolan and
surrounded Weathertop.

A
remnant of the faithful among the Dunedain of Cardolan also held out in Tyrn Gorthad (the
Barrowdowns), or took refuge in the Forest behind.

It is said that Angmar was for a time subdued by the Elvenfolk coming from Lindon; and from
Rivendell, for Elrond brought help over the Mountains out of Lórien.

Some returned to Wilderland, and dwelt beside the Gladden,
becoming a riverside people of fishers.

It is said that the mounds of Tyrn Gorthad, as the Barrowdowns were called of old, are very
ancient, and that many were built in the days of the old world of the First Age by the forefathers of
the Edain, before they crossed the Blue Mountains into Beleriand, of which Lindon is all that now
1 I, 54.

Those hills were therefore revered by the Dunedain after their return; and there many of
their lords and Kings were buried.

'For a while Arvedui hid in the tunnels of the old dwarf-mines near the far end of the
Mountains, but he was driven at last by hunger to seek the help of the Lossoth, the Snowmen of
Forochel.1 Some of these he found in camp by the seashore; but they did not help the king willingly,
for he had nothing to offer them, save a few jewels which they did cat value; and they were afraid of
the Witch-king, who (they said) could make frost or thaw at his will But partly out of pity for the
gaunt king and his men, and partly out of fear of their weapons, they gave them a little food and
built for them snow-huts.

They live mostly, inaccessible to their enemies, on the great Cape of Forochel that
shuts off to the north-west the immense bay of mat name; but they often camp on the south shores of the bay at the feet
of the Mountains'.

In the days of Arahad I the Orcs, who had, as later appeared, long
been secretly occupying strongholds in the Misty Mountains, so as to bar all the passes into Eriador,
suddenly revealed themselves.

And later in the days of Arassuil, Orcs, multiplying again in the Misty
Mountains, begin to ravage the lands, and the Dunedain and the sons of Elrond fought with them.

Ciryaher son of Ciryandil bided his time, and at last when he had gathered strength he
came down from the north by sea and by land, and crossing the River Harnen his armies utterly
defeated the Men of the Harad, and their kings were compelled to acknowledge the overlordship of
Gondor (1050).

The realm then extended north to
Celebrant and the southern eaves of Mirkwood; west to the Greyflood; east to the inland Sea of
Rhun; south to the River Harnen, and thence along the coast to the peninsula and haven of Umbar.

For in
the past the attacks of the Easterlings had come mostly over the plain between the Inland Sea and
the Ash Mountains.

On his return Romendacil fortified the west shore of Anduin as far as the inflow of the
Limlight, and forbade any stranger: to pass down the River beyond the Emyn Muil.

He called
himself King of Rhovanion, and was indeed the most powerful of the Northern princes, though his
own realm lay between Greenwood and the River Celduin.

This was remembered in Minas Anor and in Ithilien; and
1 The River Running.

Though great evil had come after, even the followers of Elendil remembered with pride the coming
of the great host of Ar-Pharazôn out of the deeps of the Sea; and on the highest hill of the headland
above the Haven they had set a great white pillar as a monument.

But Eärnil, Captain of the Southern Army, won a great victory
in South Ithilien and destroyed the army of Harad that had crossed the River Poros.

'But the Host of the West came down on him out of the Hills of Evendim, and were was a
great battle on the plain between Nenuial and the North Downs.

The forces of Angmar were already
giving way and retreating towards Fornost when the main body of the horsemen that had passed
round the hills Came down from the north and scattered them in a great rout.

Then so utterly was Angmar defeated that not a man nor an orc of that realm remained
west of the Mountains.

In the wide lands of Rhovanion, between
Mirkwood and the River Running, a fierce people now dwelt, wholly under the shadow of Dol
Guldur.

Often they made raids through the forest, until the vale of Anduin south of the Gladden was
largely deserted.

'Foreseeing the storm, Cirion sent north for aid, but over-late; for in that year (2510) the
Balchoth, having built many great boats and rafts on the east shores of Anduin, swarmed over the
River and swept away the defenders.

An army marching up from the south was cut off and driven
north over the Limlight, and there it was suddenly attacked by a horde of Orcs from the Mountains
and pressed towards the Anduin.

At the
lame time the Rohirrim were assailed from the west and the east, and their land was overrun, and
they were driven into the dales of the White Mountains.

But in Gondor south of the mountains things were less evil, and before spring came
Beregond son of Beren bad overcome the invaders.

It was in the days of Beregond that the War of the Dwarves and Orcs was fought in the Misty

Mountains (2793 9), of which only rumour came south, until the Orcs fleeing from Nanduhirion
attempted to cross Rohan and establish themselves in the White Mountains.

Long it stood, Haudh in Gwanur , high upon the shore of
the river, and the enemies of Gondor feared to pass it.

boat and crossed over Anduin, and there he said farewell to his companions and
went on alone; and when he was last seen his face was towards the Mountains of Shadow.

"
'And it happened that when Arathorn and Gilraen had been married only one year, Arador was
taken by hill-trolls in the Coldfells north of Rivendell and was slain; and Arathorn became Chieftain
of the Dunedain.

And suddenly even as he
sang he saw a maiden walking on a greensward among the white stems of the birches; and he halted
amazed, thinking that he had strayed into a dream, or else that he had received the gift of the
Elf-minstrels, who can make the things of which they sing appear before the eyes of those that
listen.
'For Aragorn had been singing a part of the Lay of Lúthien which tells of the meeting of
Lúthien and Beren in the forest of Neldoreth.

Surely your father has not kept
you locked in his hoard?"
'"No," she said, and looked up at the Mountains that rose in the east.

And on the evening of Midsummer Aragorn, Arathorn's son, and Arwen daughter of
Elrond went to the fair hill, Cerin Amroth, in the midst of the land, and they walked unshod on the
undying grass with elanor and niphredil about their feet

And there upon that hill they looked east to
the Shadow and west to the Twilight, and they plighted their troth and were glad.
'And Arwen said: "Dark is the Shadow, and yet my heart rejoices; for you, Estel, shall be
among the great whose valour will destroy it.

And on the hill
1 'I gave Hope to the Dunedain, I have kept no hope for myself.'

of Cerin Amroth when we forsook both the Shadow and the Twilight this doom we accepted.

That land lay near the sources of Anduin,
between the furthest ranges of the Misty Mountains and the northernmost parts of Mirkwood.

The
Éothéod had moved to those regions in the days of King Eärnil II from lands in the vales of Anduin
between the Carrock and the Gladden, and they were in origin close akin to the Beornings and the
men of the west-eaves of the forest.

They loved
best the plains, and delighted in horses and in all feats of horsemanship, but there were many men in
the middle vales of Anduin in those days, and moreover the shadow of Dol Guldur was lengthening;
when therefore they heard of the overthrow of the Witch-king, they sought more room in the North,
and drove away the remnants of the people of Angmar on the east side of the Mountains.

At the same time by chance or design the Orcs
(who at that time before their war with the Dwarves were in great strength) made a descent from the
Mountains.

But
in the valley of the River men were now few and scattered, and slow to render such aid as they
could.

Thus Eorl became the first King of the Mark, and he chose
for his dwelling a green hill before the feet of the White Mountains that we're the south-wall of his
land.

The Rohirrim were defeated and their land was overrun; and those who were not slain or
enslaved fled to the dales of the mountains.

The Eastern invaders perished or withdrew; and there came help
at last from Gondor, by the roads both east and west of the mountains.

Harrowdale and other
mountain-valleys were settled.

In his time there was war with Orcs that, driven from the
North, sought refuges in the White Mountains.

He was slain with all his companions when
they were trapped by Orcs, as they rode by mountain-paths from Dunharrow.

Others also came down from the Misty Mountains, many being great uruks in the
service of Saruman, though it was long before that was suspected.

Durin is the name that the Dwarves used for the eldest of the Seven Fathers of their race, and the
ancestor of all the kings of the Long-beards.1 He slept alone, until in the deeps of time and the
awakening of that people he came to Azanulbizar, and in the caves above Kheled-zâram in the east
of the Misty Mountains he made his dwelling, where afterwards were the Mines of Moria renowned
in song.

After the end of the First Age the power and wealth of Khazad-dûm was much increased; for
it was enriched by many people and much lore and craft when the ancient cities of Nogrod and
Belegost in the Blue Mountains were ruined at the breaking of Thangorodrim.

The power of Sauron, servant of Morgoth, was then again growing in the world, though
the Shadow in the Forest that looked towards Moria was not yet known for what it was.

Most of these that escaped made their way into the North, and Thráin I, Náin's son, came to
Erebor, the Lonely Mountain, near the eastern eaves of Mirkwood, and there he began new works,
and became King under the Mountain.

In Erebor he found the great jewel, the Arkenstone, Heart of
the Mountain.3

But Thorin I his son removed and went into the far North to the Grey Mountains,
where most of Durin's folk were now gathering; for those mountains were rich and little explored.

Not long after most of Durin's Folk abandoned the Grey Mountains.

Grór, Dáin's son, went
away with many followers to the Iron Hills; but Thrór, Dáin's heir, with Borin his father's brother
and the remainder of the people returned to Erebor.

For they made not only things of wonder and beauty but weapons and armour
of great worth; and there was great traffic of ore between them and their kin in the Iron Hills.

Thus
the Northmen who lived between Celduin (River Running) and Carnen (Redwater) became strong
and drove back all enemies from the East; and the Dwarves lived in plenty, and there was feasting
and song in the Halls of Erebor.4

So the rumour of the wealth of Erebor spread abroad and reached the ears of the dragons, and
at last Smaug the Golden, greatest of the dragons of his day, arose and without warning came
against King Thrór and descended on the Mountain in flames.

It was not long before all that realm
was destroyed, and the town of Dale near by was ruined and deserted; but Smaug entered into the
Great Hall and lay there upon a bed of gold.

It was afterwards learned that more of the Folk under the Mountain had escaped than was
at first hoped; but most of these went to the Iron Hills.

north with Nár, and they crossed the Redhorn Pass and came down into Azanulbizar.

But the Dwarves had the victory
through their strength, and their matchless weapons, and the fire of their anger, as they hunted for
Azog in every den under mountain.

That was a great vale that lay between the arms of the mountains about
the lake of Kheled-zâram and had been of old part of the kingdom of Khazad-dûm.

When the
Dwarves saw the gate of their ancient mansions upon the hill-side they sent up a great shout like
thunder in the valley.

There Frerin his son fell, and Fundin his kinsman, and many others, and both Thráin
and Thorin were wounded.2 Elsewhere the battle swayed to and fro with great slaughter, until at last
the people of the Iron Hills turned the day.

There was a great felling of trees in the
valley, which remained bare ever after, and the reek of the burning was seen in Lórien.1
When the dreadful fires were in ashes the allies went away to their own countries, and Dáin
Ironfoot led his father's people back to the Iron Hills.

Now they had fair halls in the mountains, and store of goods, and their days did not seem so
hard, though in their songs they spoke ever of the Lonely Mountain far away.

But to resist any attempt from the East to regain the lands of Angmar and the
northern passes in the mountains there were now only the Dwarves of the Iron Hills.

The story is told elsewhere of what came of that meeting: of the strange plan that Gandalf
made for the help of Thorin, and how Thorin and his companions set out from the Shire on the quest
of the Lonely Mountain that came to great ends unforeseen.

In that first Battle of Dale, Thorin Oakenshield was
mortally wounded; and he died and was laid in a tomb under the Mountain with the Arkenstone
upon his breast.

But Dáin Ironfoot, his cousin, who
came from the Iron Hills to his aid and was also his rightful heir, became then King Dáin II, and the
Kingdom under the Mountain was restored, even as Gandalf had desired.

After the fall of Sauron, Gimli brought south a part of the Dwarf-folk of Erebor, and he
became Lord of the Glittering Caves.

Most of these dwelt in
Lindon west of the Ered Luin; but before the building of the Barad-dûr many of the Sindar passed
eastward, and some established realms in the forests far away, where their people were mostly
Silvan Elves.

Later some of the Noldor went to Eregion, upon the west of the Misty Mountains, and near to
the West-gate of Moria.

The host of the Alliance crosses the Misty Mountains.

For this is the Ring of Fire, and with it you may
rekindle hearts in a world that grows chill.

Orcs increase in the Misty Mountains and attack
the Dwarves.

Thráin I comes to Erebor and founds a dwarf-kingdom 'under the Mountain'.
2000.

Thorin I leaves Erebor, and goes north to the Grey Mountains, where most of the
remnants of Durin's Folk are now gathering.
2340.

About this time Sméagol-Gollum hides in the Misty Mountains.

Orcs begin to make secret strongholds in the Misty Mountains so as to bar all the
passes into Eriador.

Grór his brother goes to the Iron Hills.

Dáin Ironfoot returns to the Iron
Hills.

The Baranduin and other rivers are frozen.

The White Council meets; Saruman agrees to an attack on Dol Guldur, since he
now wishes to prevent Sauron from searching the River.

Dáin of the Iron Hills becomes King under the Mountain (Dáin II).

Gollum leaves the Mountains and begins his
search for the 'thief' of the Ring.
2948.

Aragorn gives her the
ring of Barahir, and they plight their troth upon the hill of Cerin Amroth.

Elrond sends for Arwen, and she returns to Imladris; the Mountains and all lands eastward are
becoming dangerous.
3017.

The Old Forest.

Éomer overtakes the Orcs just outside Fangorn Forest.
29.

Théoden in Drúadan Forest.

The Host is surrounded on the Slag-hills.

They took Dol Guldur, and Galadriel threw down its walls and laid bare its pits, and the
forest was cleansed.

And
on the day of the New Year of the Elves, Celeborn and Thranduil met in the midst of the forest; and
they renamed Mirkwood Eryn Lasgalen, The Wood of Greenleaves.

Thranduil took all the northern
region as far as the mountains that rise in the forest for his realm; and Celeborn took the southern
wood below the Narrows, and named it East Lórien; all the wide forest between was given to the
Beornings and the Woodmen.

At the same time as the great armies besieged Minas Tirith a host of the allies of Sauron that

had long threatened the borders of King Brand crossed the River Carnen, and Brand was driven
back to Dale.

There he had the aid of the Dwarves of Erebor; and there was a great battle at the
Mountain's feet It lasted three days, but in the end both King Brand and King Dáin Ironfoot were
slain, and the Easterlings had the victory.

Then Bard II, Brand's son, became King in Dale, and Thorin III Stonehelm,
Dáin's son, became King under the Mountain.

They halt in sight of the Mountains of Moria.

The Westmarch, from the Far Downs to the Tower Hills (Emyn Beraid ),1 is added to
the Shire by the gift of the King.

Fastred and Elanor make their dwelling at Undertowers on the
Tower Hills, where their descendants, the Fairbairns of the Towers, dwelt for many generations.
1463.

He comes to the Tower Hills, and is last seen by Elanor,
to whom he gives the Red Book afterwards kept by the Fairbairns.

There is no record of the Shire-folk commemorating either March 25 or September 22; but in
the Westfarthing, especially in the country round Hobbiton Hill, there grew a custom of making
holiday and dancing in the Party Field, when weather permitted, on April 6.

For this sound y has been used (as in ancient English): as in lyg 'snake', Q.
leuca , or emyn pl. of amon 'hill'.

