There had been the first ride at terrible speed without a halt, and then in the dawn he had seen
a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the silent town and the great empty house on the hill.
And hardly had they reached its shelter when the winged shadow had passed over once again, and
men wilted with fear.

But Gandalf had spoken soft words to him, and he had slept in a corner, tired
but uneasy, dimly aware of comings and goings and of men talking and Gandalf giving orders.

So the night was not yet old and for hours the dark journey would go on.

'In the realm of Gondor,' the wizard answered.

Are there dragons in this land?

The beacons of Gondor are alight, calling for aid.

See, there is the fire on
Amon Dîn, and flame on Eilenach; and there they go speeding west: Nardol, Erelas, Min-Rimmon,
Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.'

Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling him of the customs of
Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built on the tops of outlying hills along both
borders of the great range, and maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in
readiness to bear his errand-riders to Rohan in the North, or to Belfalas in the South.

'It is long since
the beacons of the North were lit,' he said, 'and in the ancient days of Gondor they were not needed,
for they had the Seven Stones.'

For you are not going like Frodo to Mordor,
but to Minas Tirith, and there you will be as safe as you can be anywhere in these days.

If Gondor
falls, or the Ring is taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.'
'You do not comfort me,' said Pippin, but nonetheless sleep crept over him.

Gondor ere

Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader of the men, 'and you know the
pass-words of the Seven Gates and are free to go forward.

We wish for no strangers in the land at this
time, unless they be mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.'
'I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. '

He has passed through more battles and perils than you have, Ingold,
though you be twice his height; and he comes now from the storming of Isengard, of which we bear
tidings, and great weariness is on him, or I would wake him.

His name is Peregrin, a very valiant
man.'
'Man?' said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed.

I am a hobbit and no more
valiant than I am a man, save perhaps now and again by necessity.

Do not let Gandalf deceive you!'
'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold.

And Boromir of your City was with us,
and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the last he was slain defending me from many
foes.'

'Peace!'

'It has been guessed already,' said Ingold, 'for there have been strange portents here of late.

said Ingold; and the men made way for Shadowfax, and he passed through a
narrow gate in the wall.

'May you bring good counsel to Denethor in his need, and to us all,
Mithrandir!'

Ingold cried.

'But you come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.'
'Because I come seldom but when my help is needed,' answered Gandalf. '

Courage will now be
your best defence against the storm that is at hand – that and such hope as I bring.

For not all the
tidings that I bring are evil.

'The work will be finished ere evening,' said Ingold.

So the men of Gondor
called the out wall that they had built with great labour, after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their
Enemy.

There Anduin, going in a wide knee about the hills of Emyn Arnen in
South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and the out-wall rose upon its very brink; and beneath it lay the
quays and landings of the Harlond for craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.

Yet the herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part of the
people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the City, or in the high vales of the mountain-borders,
in Lossarnach, or further south in fair Lebennin with its five swift streams.

They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood was
mingled, and there were short and swarthy folk among them whose sires came more from the
forgotten men who housed in the shadow of the hills in the Dark Years ere the coming of the kings.

So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate of the Men of Gondor at the rising of the sun,
and its iron doors rolled back before them.
'

Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the
Gondor that you have known.

Then men fell back before the command of his voice and questioned him no further, though
they gazed in wonder at the hobbit that sat before him and at the horse that bore him.

For the people
of the City used horses very little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden
by the errand-riders of their lord.

And each time that it passed the
line of the Great Gate it went through an arched tunnel, piercing a vast pier of rock whose huge
out-thrust bulk divided in two all the circles of the City save the first.

But that shoulder, which rose to the height of the fifth wall, was hedged with great ramparts
right up to the precipice that overhung its western end; and in that space stood the houses and
domed tombs of bygone kings and lords, for ever silent between the mountain and the tower.

This was the livery of the heirs of Elendil, and none wore it now in all Gondor, save the Guards of
the Citadel before the Court of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown.

Already it seemed that word of their coming had gone before them: and at once they were
admitted, silently, and without question.

But he will speak most to you, and question you much, since
you can tell him of his son Boromir.

And say nothing about Aragorn either,
unless you must.'
'Why not?

See, Master Pippin, there is no time to
instruct you now in the history of Gondor; though it might have been better, if you had learned
something of it, when you were still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods of the Shire.

It is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his heir to a mighty lord to speak
over much of the coming of one who will, if he comes, claim the kingship.

Monoliths of black marble, they rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of beasts
and leaves; and far above in shadow the wide vaulting gleamed with dull gold, inset with flowing
traceries of many colours.

Suddenly Pippin was reminded of the hewn rocks of Argonath, and awe fell on him, as he
looked down that avenue of kings long dead.

In his hand was a white rod with a golden knob.

Pippin saw his carven face with its proud bones and skin like
ivory, and the long curved nose between the dark deep eyes; and he was reminded not so much of
Boromir as of Aragorn. '

But though all the signs forebode that the doom of Gondor is drawing nigh,
less now to me is that darkness than my own darkness.

It has been told to me that you bring with
you one who saw my son die.

Faramir should have gone in his stead.'

'He would have gone,' said Gandalf. '

I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches
thirteen days ago, and the River brought it to me, broken: it will wind no more.'

But no help came.

Why did
no help come?

Pippin flushed and forgot his fear.

He died to save us, my kinsman
Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by the soldiery of the Dark Lord; and though he fell
and failed, my gratitude is none the less.'

'Little service, no doubt, will so great a lord of Men
think to find in a hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I will offer it, in
payment of my debt.'

The old man laid the sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to the hilt, and said slowly
after Denethor:
'Here do I swear fealty and service to Gondor, and to the Lord and Steward of the realm, to
speak and to be silent, to do and to let be, to come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in
living or dying, from this hour henceforth, until my lord release me, or death take me, or the world
end.

And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord of Gondor, Steward of the High King, and
I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is given: fealty with love, valour with honour,
oath-breaking with vengeance.'

As he spoke he
struck a small silver gong that stood near his footstool, and at once servants came forward.

'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see that none trouble us for
one hour.'

For I have not ridden hither from Isengard, one
hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind, only to bring you one small warrior, however
courteous.

'Yea,' he said, 'for though the Stones be lost, they say, still the lords of Gondor have keener
sight than lesser men, and many messages come to them.

Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver with a silver flagon
and cups, and white cakes.

'For the words
of one whom my son so befriended will be welcome indeed.'
Pippin never forgot that hour in the great hall under the piercing eye of the Lord of Gondor,
stabbed ever and anon by his shrewd questions, and all the while conscious of Gandalf at his side,
watching and listening, and (so Pippin felt) holding in check a rising wrath and impatience.

When
the hour was over and Denethor again rang the gong, Pippin felt worn out.

None shall hinder your
coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours of sleep.

Do you think that I do not understand your purpose in questioning for an hour
one who knows the least, while I sit by?'
'If you understand it, then be content,' returned Denethor.

'Pride would be folly that disdained
help and counsel at need; but you deal out such gifts according to your own designs.

Yet the Lord of
Gondor is not to be made the tool of other men's purposes, however worthy.

And to him there is no
purpose higher in the world as it now stands than the good of Gondor; and the rule of Gondor, my
lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king should come again.'
'Unless the king should come again?' said Gandalf. '

But I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, neither of
Gondor nor any other, great or small.

And for my part, I shall not wholly fail of my task, though Gondor should perish,
if anything passes through this night that can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower again in days to
come.

Within, upon the first
floor above the street, up a wide carven stair, he showed them to a fair room, light and airy, with
goodly hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured.

'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard, 'and I hope that it may be long before you find
yourself in such a tight corner again between two such terrible old men.

Still the Lord of Gondor
learned more from you than you may have guessed, Pippin.

Men think much about the stories
of old days in Gondor; and Denethor has given long thought to the rhyme and to the words Isildur's
Bane , since Boromir went away.
'He is not as other men of this time, Pippin, and whatever be his descent from father to son, by
some chance the blood of Westernesse runs nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir,
and yet did not in Boromir whom he loved best.

'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may bring.

For one thing,
tomorrow will be certain to bring worse than today, for many days to come.

And there is nothing

more that I can do to help it.

One piece that I greatly
desire to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor.

I must go, Pippin.

I must go to this lords' council and learn what I can.

And pawns are likely to see as
much of it as any, Peregrin son of Paladin, soldier of Gondor.

'Do me a favour
when you go out.

Go and find Shadowfax and see
how he is housed.

These people are kindly to beasts, for they are a good and wise folk, but they
have less skill with horses than some.'

Armed
men went to and fro in the ways of the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to changes of post
and duty.

'I am named Beregond son of Baranor.

Aragorn was the only one of
our Company, I think, who really knew him.'
'Aragorn?' said Beregond.

What would you know, Master Peregrin?'
'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to say so, rather a burning question in my mind at
present is, well, what about breakfast and all that?

Beregond looked at him gravely.

'They say that men who
go warring afield look ever to the next hope of food and of drink; though I am not a travelled man
myself.

'But no more than a cup of wine and a white
cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but he racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that
is hungry work.'

Beregond laughed.

We rise ere the Sun, and take a morsel in the grey light,
and go to our duties at the opening hour.

We will walk a little and then go find us some refreshment, and eat and drink on the
battlement, and survey the fair morning.'

I think his new master loves the beast better than he loves many men, and if his good
will is of any value to this city, you will treat Shadowfax with all honour: with greater kindness than
you have treated this hobbit, if it is possible.'
'Hobbit?' said Beregond.

'I am glad to learn it,' said Beregond, 'for now I may say that strange accents do not mar fair
speech, and hobbits are a fair-spoken folk.

You shall make me acquainted with this good
horse.

The visit shall be short, a mere call of
courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.'

For in the sixth circle, outside
the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables where a few swift horses were kept, hard by the
lodgings of the errand-riders of the Lord: messengers always ready to go at the urgent command of
Denethor or his chief captains.

Good morning!' said
Pippin.

But he allowed Beregond to handle his head gently
and stroke his great flanks.

'He looks as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a great journey,' said
Beregond.

'And now for our manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the citadel, and so to a
door in the north side of the great tower.

'This is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the Guard.' said Beregond.

'Greetings,
Targon!'

They got there bread, and butter, and cheese and apples: the last of the winter store, wrinkled
but sound and sweet; and a leather flagon of new-drawn ale, and wooden platters and cups.

They
put all into a wicker basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place
at the east end of the great out-thrust battlement where there was an embrasure in the walls with a
stone seat beneath the sill.

They ate and drank; and they talked now of Gondor and its ways and customs, now of the
Shire and the strange countries that Pippin had seen.

And ever as they talked Beregond was more
amazed, and looked with greater wonder at the hobbit, swinging his short legs as he sat on the seat,
or standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below.

'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us you look almost as one
of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet you have endured perils and seen marvels that
few of our greybeards could boast of.

Many roads and
tracks crossed the green fields, and there was much coming and going: wains moving in lines
towards the Great Gate, and others passing out.

On the ride horsemen galloped to and fro, but all the street seemed to be choked
with great covered wains going south.

But soon Pippin saw that all was in fact well-ordered: the
wains were moving in three lines, one swifter drawn by horses; another slower, great waggons with
fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and along the west rim of the road many smaller
carts hauled by trudging men.

'That is the road to the vales of Tumladen and Lossarnach, and the mountain-villages, and
then on to Lebennin,' said Beregond.

'There go the last of the wains that bear away to refuge the
aged, the children, and the women that must go with them.

They must all be gone from the Gate and
the road clear for a league before noon: that was the order.

And there were always too few children in this city;
but now there are none - save some young lads that will not depart, and may find some task to do:
my own son is one of them.'

'Is that another city, or what is it?'

'It was a city,' said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor, of which this was only a fortress.

For
that is the ruin of Osgiliath on either side of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago.

And then came the Fell Riders out of Minas
Morgul.'
'The Black Riders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes, and they were wide and dark with an old
fear re-awakened.
'Yes, they were black,' said Beregond, 'and I see that you know something of them, though
you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.'

'So near to Mordor?' said Beregond quietly. '

And the
Fell Riders, less than a year ago they won back the crossings, and many of our best men were slain.

'Only because everything is now ready,' said Beregond.

'It is but the deep breath before the
plunge.'
'But why were the beacons lit last night?'
'It is over-late to send for aid when you are already besieged,' answered Beregond.

Some say that as he sits alone in his high
chamber in the Tower at night, and bends his thought this way and that, he can read somewhat of
the future; and that he will at times search even the mind of the Enemy, wrestling with him.

They have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor, and they
have allied them with the Enemy, and now make a heavy stroke in his cause.

For this attack will
draw off much of the help that we looked to have from Lebennin and Belfalas, where folk are hardy
and numerous.

All the more do our thoughts go north to Rohan; and the more glad are we for these
tidings of victory that you bring.

'What was that?' asked Beregond.

'It is the sign of our fall, and the shadow of doom, a Fell Rider of the
air.'
'Yes, the shadow of doom,' said Beregond.

cried Beregond, rising and striding to and fro.

Nay, though all things must
come utterly to an end in time, Gondor shall not perish yet.

'All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill,' said Pippin.

No stroke would have been struck in Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.'
'Ah, there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel!' said Beregond.

So they talked until the sun reached its height, and suddenly the noon-bells were rung, and
there was a stir in the citadel; for all save the watchmen were going to their meal.

'Will you come with me?' said Beregond.

If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?'
'Nay, nay,' Beregond laughed, 'I am no captain.

Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only
a man of arms of the Guard of the Tower of Gondor is held worthy in the City, and such men have
honour in the land.'

'Take me back to our room, and if Gandalf is not there,
I will go where you like – as your guest.'

Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so Pippin went with Beregond and
was made known to the men of the Third Company.

And it seemed that Beregond got as much
honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was very welcome.

There had already been much talk in the
citadel about Mithrandir's companion and his long closeting with the Lord; and rumour declared
that a Prince of the Halflings had come out of the North to offer allegiance to Gondor and five
thousand swords.

And some said that when the Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind
him a halfling warrior, small maybe, but doughty.

At length Beregond rose.

My son would go with you gladly.

A good lad, I may say.

If that pleases you,
go down to the lowest circle and ask for the Old Guesthouse in the Rath Celerdain, the
Lampwrights' Street.

You will find him there with other lads that are remaining in the City.

Pippin felt sleepy, but the lodging
seemed cheerless, and he decided to go down and explore the City.

He took a few morsels that he
had saved to Shadowfax, and they were graciously accepted, though the horse seemed to have no
lack.

To his face men were gravely courteous, saluting him after
the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands upon the breast; but behind him he heard many
calls, as those out of doors cried to others within to come and see the Prince of the Halflings, the
companion of Mithrandir.

Many used some other tongue than the Common Speech, but it was not
long before he learned at least what was meant by Ernil i Pheriannath and knew that his title had
gone down before him into the City.

You are a stranger in the City.'
'I was,' said Pippin, 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.'
'Oh come!' said the lad.

What is your father?'
'Which question shall I answer first?' said Pippin.

I am nearly twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four
feet, and not likely to grow any more, save sideways.'
'Twenty-nine!' said the lad and whistled.

'I am Bergil son of Beregond of the Guards,' he said.

I know him and he sent me to find
you.'
'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look of dismay came over
his face.

But
no, the last wains have gone.'
'His message is less bad than that, if not good.'

We were
soon going to the Gate to look on.

We will go now.'
'What is happening there?'
'The Captains of the Outlands are expected up the South Road ere sundown.

Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had since he parted from Merry,
and soon they were laughing and talking gaily as they went about the streets, heedless of the many
glances that men gave them.

Before long they found themselves in a throng going towards the Great
Gate.

'That is good!' said Bergil.

Good old Forlong!'

Behind him marched proudly a dusty line of men, well-armed and bearing great
battle-axes; grim-faced they were, and shorter and somewhat swarthier than any men that Pippin
had yet seen in Gondor.

And so the companies came and were hailed and cheered and passed through the Gate, men of
the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor in a dark hour; but always too few, always less
than hope looked for or need asked.

From the Anfalas, the
Langstrand far away, a long line of men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little
villages, scantily equipped save for the household of Golasgil their lord.

Already the closing hour was
drawing nigh, and the red sun had gone behind Mindolluin.

There goes the
trumpet for the closing of the Gate.'

We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's
house; it is good to be there in Spring, the woods and fields are full of flowers.

But maybe we will
go thither together yet.

He was late
for the daymeal in the mess, and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news
of his son.

'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at the door of the small hall, on the north side of the
citadel, where they had sat.

The lodging was dark, save for a little lantern set on the table.

He got down and closed the shutter and went to bed.

'I thought you had forgotten all about
me.

There
will be no dawn.'

Chapter 2
The Passing of the Grey Company
Gandalf was gone, and the thudding hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the night, when Merry
came back to Aragorn.

Legolas and Gimli with their horse stood close by.

'So four of the Company still remain,' said Aragorn.

But we shall not
go alone, as I thought.

Since the coming of the
winged shadow, he desires to return to the hills under cover of night.'
'And then whither?' said Legolas.

'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered.

'As for the king, he will go to the muster that he
commanded at Edoras, four nights from now.

And there, I think, he will hear tidings of war, and the
Riders of Rohan will go down to Minas Tirith.

But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .'
'I for one!' cried Legolas.

'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me.

I must go down also to Minas Tirith, but
I do not yet see the road.

'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I think, Merry.

Soon all were ready to depart: twenty-four horses, with Gimli behind Legolas, and Merry in
front of Aragorn.

Aragorn
dismounted and set Merry on the ground, and drawing his sword he stood by the king's stirrup.

Supposing the king's small escort was trapped
and overcome, but he escaped into the darkness – alone in the wild fields of Rohan with no idea of
where he was in all the endless miles? 'No good!'

None ride here save by his leave.

'We seek one Aragorn son of
Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.'
'And you have found him also!' cried Aragorn.

'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back.

'That is all of our kindred that could be gathered in
haste; but the brethren Elladan and Elrohir have ridden with us, desiring to go to the war.

We rode
as swiftly as we might when your summons came.'
'But I did not summon you,' said Aragorn, 'save only in wish.

You find us riding in haste and danger.

'If these kinsmen be in any way like
to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.'

Then the Riders set out again, and Aragorn for a while rode with the Dunedain; and when they
had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South, Elrohir said to him:
'I bring word to you from my father: The days are short.

If thou art in haste, remember the
Paths of the Dead .'
'Always my days have seemed to me too short to achieve my desire,' answered Aragorn.

And Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is that that you bear, kinsman?'

'It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered Halbarad.

And Aragorn said: 'Now I know what you bear.

Merry slept until he was roused by Legolas and Gimli. '

The Sun is high,' said Legolas.

Come, Master Sluggard, and look at this place while you may!'
'There was a battle here three nights ago

,' said Gimli, 'and here Legolas and I played a game
that I won only by a single orc.

Shall we visit them, Legolas, do you think?'
'Nay!

Merry got up and yawned.

'Where is Aragorn?' he asked.

'In a high chamber of the Burg,' said Legolas.

He went
thither some hours ago, saying that he must take thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went
with him; but some dark doubt or care sits on him.'
'They are a strange company, these newcomers,' said Gimli.

'Stout men and lordly they are,
and the Riders of Rohan look almost as boys beside them; for they are grim men of face, worn like
weathered rocks for the most part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.'
'But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence.' said Legolas.

'Word came to Rivendell, they say:
Aragorn has need of his kindred.

Gandalf sent it, I would guess.'
'Nay, Galadriel,' said Legolas.

Now
why did not we wish for some of our own kinsfolk, Legolas?'
Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and east, and his fair face
was troubled.

And your friend is gone, who should also be here.

'I have had a good hill-pony made ready for you.

'Take your sword and bear it unto good fortune!'
'As a father you shall be to me,' said Merry.

'It is near the hour that we
set for our going, lord,' he said.

But where is Aragorn?

'We will make ready to ride,' said Théoden, 'but let word be sent to the Lord Aragorn that the
hour is nigh.'

A thousand spears had indeed already ridden away at
night; but still there would be some five hundred more to go with the king, for the most part men
from the fields and dales of Westfold.

Their horses were strong and of proud bearing, but rough-haired; and one stood there without a
rider, Aragorn's own horse that they had brought from the North; Roheryn was his name.

There was
no gleam of stone or gold, nor any fair thing in all their gear and harness: nor did their riders bear
any badge or token, save only that each cloak was pinned upon the left shoulder by a brooch of
silver shaped like a rayed star.

Presently Éomer came out from the gate, and with him was Aragorn, and Halbarad
bearing the great staff close-furled in black, and two tall men, neither young nor old, so much alike
were they, the sons of Elrond, that few could tell them apart: dark-haired, grey-eyed, and their faces
elven-fair, clad alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver-grey.

Behind them walked Legolas and
Gimli.

But Merry had eyes only for Aragorn, so startling was the change that he saw in him, as if in
one night many years had fallen on his head.

Aragorn was silent for a moment.

Éomer
turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the faces of the Riders that sat within
hearing turned pale at the words.

Aragorn my friend!'

'That road I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn.

'But I say to you, Éomer, that in battle we
may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor should stand between.'
'You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,' said Théoden.

said Aragorn. '

I leave you in good
hands, better than we hoped when we hunted the orcs to Fangorn.

Legolas and Gimli will still hunt
with me, I hope; but we shall not forget you.'
'Good-bye!' said Merry.

He could find no more to say.

Aragorn rode to the Dike and watched till the
king's men were far down the Coomb.

'There go three that I love, and the smallest not the least,' he said.

He knows not to what end
he rides; yet if he knew, he still would go on.'

'Little do they know of
our long labour for the safekeeping of their borders, and yet I grudge it not.'
'And now our fates are woven together,' said Aragorn. '

Come, Legolas and Gimli!

Together they went back into the Burg; yet for some time Aragorn sat silent at the table in the
hall, and the others waited for him to speak. 'Come!' said Legolas at last.

What has happened since we came back to this grim place in the grey
morning?'
'A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the Hornburg,' answered
Aragorn.

Even Gandalf feared that encounter.'
'You forget to whom you speak,' said Aragorn sternly, and his eyes glinted.

That alone he will find hard to
endure.

The eyes in Orthanc did not see
through the armour of Théoden; but Sauron has not forgotten Isildur and the sword of Elendil.

'But he wields great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli, 'and now he will strike more swiftly.'
'The hasty stroke goes oft astray,' said Aragorn.

A
grave peril I saw coming unlooked-for upon Gondor from the South that will draw off great strength
from the defence of Minas Tirith.

If it is not countered swiftly, I deem that the City will be lost ere
ten days be gone.'
'Then lost it must be,' said Gimli.

'For what help is there to send thither, and how could it
come there in time?'
'I have no help to send, therefore I must go myself,' said Aragorn.

'But there is only one way
through the mountains that will bring me to the coastlands before all is lost.

And even if you pass that way, what
will so few avail to counter the strokes of Mordor?'
'The living have never used that road since the coming of the Rohirrim,' said Aragorn, 'for it is
closed to them.

This is the
word that the sons of Elrond bring to me from their father in Rivendell, wisest in lore: Bid Aragorn
remember the words of the seer, and the Paths of the Dead .'
'And what may be the words of the seer?' said Legolas.

“Thus spoke Malbeth the Seer, in the days of Arvedui, last king at Fornost,' said Aragorn:

Who shall call them
from the prey twilight, the forgotten people?

'Dark ways doubtless,' said Gimli, 'but no darker than these staves are to me.'
'If you would understand them better, then I bid you come with me,' said Aragorn, 'for that
way I now shall take.

But I do not go gladly; only need drives me.

Therefore, only of your free will
would I have you come, for you will find both toil and great fear, and maybe worse.'
'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever end they may lead,' said
Gimli.

'I also will come,' said Legolas, 'for I do not fear the Dead.'
'I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to fight,' said Gimli, 'for
otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.'
'That we shall know if ever we come to Erech,' said Aragorn.

For at Erech there
stands yet a black stone that was brought, it was said, from Númenor by Isildur; and it was set upon
a hill, and upon it the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to him in the beginning of the realm
of Gondor.

And they fled before the wrath of Isildur, and did not dare to go forth to war on Sauron's
part; and they hid themselves in secret places in the mountains and had no dealings with other men,
but slowly dwindled in the barren hills.

But that way I must go, since there are none living
to help me.'

Come with me who will!'
Legolas and Gimli made no answer, but they rose and followed Aragorn from the hall.

Legolas and Gimli mounted.

Aragorn
sprang upon Roheryn.

The Lady Éowyn greeted them and was glad of their coming; for no mightier men had she
seen than the Dunedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but on Aragorn most of all her eyes rested.

But at last she said: 'Lords, you are weary and shall now go to your beds with such ease as can
be contrived in haste.

But Aragorn said: 'Nay, lady, be not troubled for us!

For I ride on an errand most urgent, and with the first light of
morning we must go.'

She smiled on him and said: 'Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so many miles out of your
way to bring tidings to Éowyn, and to speak with her in her exile.'

'Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted,' said Aragorn, 'and yet, lady, I could not
have come hither, if it were not that the road which I must take leads me to Dunharrow.'

But, Aragorn,' she said at last, 'is it then your errand to seek death?

For
that is all that you will find on that road.

'They may suffer me to pass,' said Aragorn, 'but at the least I will adventure it.

I beg you to remain and
ride with my brother; for then all our hearts will be gladdened, and our hope be the brighter.'
'It is not madness, lady,' he answered, 'for I go on a path appointed.

Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever upon Aragorn, and the
others saw that she was in great torment of mind.

But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and Gimli, and his

companions had gone in, there came the Lady Éowyn after him and called to him.

He turned and
saw her as a glimmer in the night, for she was clad in white; but her eyes were on fire.
'Aragorn,' she said, 'why will you go on this deadly road?'
'Because I must,' he said.

Were I to go where my heart dwells, far in the North
I would now be wandering in the fair valley of Rivendell.'

'Lord,' she said, 'if you must go, then let me ride in your following.

'But as for you, lady: did you not accept the
charge to govern the people until their lord's return?

'Shall I always be left behind when the Riders
depart, to mind the house while they win renown, and find food and beds when they return?'
'A time may come soon,' said he, 'when none will return.

'To stay behind bars, until use and old age accept them, and all chance of
doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.'
'And yet you counselled me not to adventure on the road that I had chosen, because it is
perilous?'
'So may one counsel another,' she said. '

For you have no errand to the
South.'
'Neither have those others who go with thee.

They go only because they would not be parted
from thee – because they love thee.'

When the light of day was come into the sky but the sun was not yet risen above the high
ridges in the East, Aragorn made ready to depart.

In her hand she bore a cup, and she set it to her lips and drank a little, wishing
them good speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn, and he drank, and he said: 'Farewell, Lady
of Rohan!

Then it seemed to Gimli and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and in one so stern and
proud that seemed the more grievous.

But she said: 'Aragorn, wilt thou go?'
'I will,' he said.

But none of her folk saw this parting, for they hid
themselves in fear and would not come forth until the day was up, and the reckless strangers were
gone.

Let them go where they belong, into the dark places,
and never return.

There under the gloom of black trees that not even
Legolas could long endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root, and right in
their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom.

The company halted, and there was not a heart among them that did not quail, unless it were
the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts of Men have no terror.

'But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too,' said Aragorn.

'For if ever we come
through this darkness, many leagues lie beyond, and every hour that is lost there will bring the

triumph of Sauron nearer.

Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that hour that all the
Dunedain and their horses followed him.

Then Legolas laid his hands on
his eyes and sang some words that went soft in the gloom, until he suffered himself to be led, and
Legolas passed in.

'An Elf
will go underground and a Dwarf dare not!'

Aragorn had brought torches from Dunharrow, and now he went ahead bearing one aloft; and
Elladan with another went at the rear, and Gimli, stumbling behind, strove to overtake him.

Away to the left something glittered in the gloom as Aragorn's torch drew
near.

Then Aragorn halted and went to look what it might be.

'In any other cave Gimli Glóin's son would have
been the first to run to the gleam of gold.

Nonetheless he drew near, and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held aloft both torches.

His belt was of gold and
garnets, and rich with gold was the helm upon his bony head face downward on the floor.

Aragorn did not touch him, but after gazing silently for a while he rose and sighed.

He stumbled on until he was crawling
like a beast on the ground and felt that he could endure no more: he must either find an ending and
escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear.

the company passed through another gateway, high-arched and
broad, and a rill ran out beside them; and beyond, going steeply down, was a road between sheer
cliffs, knife-edged against the sky far above.

The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas.

Legolas turning to speak to
Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before his face the glitter in the Elf's bright eyes.

'The Dead are following,' said Legolas.

Its steep slopes were grass-grown; but all was grey in that hour, for the sun had gone,
and far below lights twinkled in the homes of Men.

Then without turning Aragorn cried aloud so that all could hear: 'Friends, forget your
weariness!

Bells were ringing far below, and all men fled before the face of Aragorn; but the Grey
Company in their haste rode like hunters, until their horses were stumbling with weariness.

Then Elrohir gave to
Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and it seemed to those that stood near that they heard a
sound of answering horns, as if it was an echo in deep caves far away.

But Aragorn dismounted, and
standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice:
'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?'

Then Aragorn said: 'The hour is come at last.

Now I go to Pelargir upon Anduin, and ye shall
come after me.

For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.'

But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led the Company forth
upon the journey of greatest haste and weariness that any among them had known, save he alone,
and only his will held them to go on.

No other mortal Men could have endured it, none but the
Dunedain of the North, and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.

The township and the fords of Ciril they
found deserted, for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to the hills at the
rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead.

When at last they came to the bottom of the gorge they found that evening
had fallen in the deep places.

The sun was gone.

He wondered
where in all this strange world Pippin had got to; and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas
and Gimli.

And I came to help them; but now they must be hundreds of miles away, if they are still alive.'

The paths out
of the narrow gorge fell steeply.

'This journey is over, maybe,' said Théoden, 'but I have far yet to go.

If the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills?

'At dawn three days ago, lord,' he said. '

'I will ride now to the Hold, and there before I go to rest I will meet
the marshals and captains.

Some in the wearing of the years had lost all features save the dark holes of their eyes
that still stared sadly at the passers-by.

Only the king and his guard were
going up into the Hold.

Such was the dark Dunharrow, the work of long-forgotten men.

Here they laboured in the Dark Years, before ever a ship
came to the western shores, or Gondor of the Dunedain was built; and now they had vanished, and
only the old Pukel-men were left, still sitting at the turnings of the road.

He
wondered what they could be, and he hoped that the king was not going to follow them into the
darkness beyond.

'So Aragorn has come then,' said Éomer.

'Is he still here?'
'No, he is gone,' said Éowyn turning away and looking at the mountains dark against the East
and South.

'Whither did he go?' asked Éomer.

He is gone.'
'You are grieved, daughter,' said Théoden.

He is gone.'
'Then our paths are sundered,' said Éomer.

There Merry found that everything was made ready, and that he himself
was not forgotten.

A little tent had been pitched for him beside the king's lodging; and there he sat
alone, while men passed to and fro, going in to the king and taking counsel with him.

They have all gone to some doom: Gandalf and Pippin to war in
the East; and Sam and Frodo to Mordor; and Strider and Legolas and Gimli to the Paths of the
Dead.

For I must go where he goes now.'

In the midst of these gloomy thoughts he suddenly remembered that he was very hungry, and
he got up to go and see if anyone else in this strange camp felt the same.

There
was indeed little speech, and they ate and drank for the most part in silence, until at last, plucking
up courage, Merry asked the question that was tormenting him.

And where
has Strider, I mean the Lord Aragorn where has he gone?'

If these old tales speak true that have come down from father to son in the House of Eorl,
then the Door under Dwimorberg leads to a secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some
forgotten end.

But none have ever ventured in to search its secrets, since Baldor, son of Brego,
passed the Door and was never seen among men again.

A rash vow he spoke, as he drained the horn
at that feast which Brego made to hallow new-built Meduseld, and he came never to the high seat of
which he was the heir.

that in the moonless nights but little
while ago a great host in strange array passed by.

Whence they came none knew, but they went up
the stony road and vanished into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.'
'Then why has Aragorn gone that way?' asked Merry.

It is said that when the Eorlingas came out of the North and passed
at length up the Snowbourn, seeking strong places of refuge in time of need, Brego and his son
Baldor climbed the Stair of the Hold and so came before the Door.

Yet maybe at last the time foretold has come, and Aragorn may pass.'

'But how shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by daring the Door?'
said Éomer. '

And that way I would not go though all the hosts of Mordor stood before me, and I
were alone and had no other refuge.

A man is here, lord,' he said, 'an
errand-rider of Gondor.

Hail Lord of the Rohirrim, friend
of Gondor!'

'Hirgon I am, errand-rider of Denethor, who bring you this token of war.

Gondor is in great need.

Often the Rohirrim have aided us, but now the Lord Denethor asks for all
your strength and all your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.'
'The Red Arrow!'

And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that all my strength
and all my speed may be?'
'That is best known to yourself, lord,' said Hirgon.

Is it not true,
Hirgon, that the Lord of Minas Tirith knows more than he sets in his message?

For we are already at
war, as you may have seen, and you do not find us all unprepared.

'What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot say,' answered
Hirgon.

My lord does not issue any command to you, he begs you
only to remember old friendship and oaths long spoken, and for your own good to do all that you
may.

From the North to the field of Dagorlad there is skirmish and rumour of war.

In the South the
Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on all our coastlands, so that little help will come to us
thence.

For say to Denethor that in this
hour the King of the Mark himself will come down to the land of Gondor, though maybe he will not
ride back.

'A week!' said Hirgon.

But you are like to find only ruined walls in
seven days from now, unless other help unlooked-for comes.

'But I myself am new-come from battle and long
journey, and I will now go to rest.

'Go now each to your rest,' he said, 'and sleep
well.

Good night!'
'I won't be left behind, to be called for on return!'

Hirgon the rider of Gondor
was there before him, and beside him stood now another man, like him and dressed alike, but
shorter and broader.

Have you good store in Minas Tirith?

'We have very great store long prepared,' answered Hirgon.

'I am going to war, Master Meriadoc,' he said.

You shall abide here,
and if you will, you shall serve the Lady Éowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.'
'But, but, lord,' Merry stammered, 'I offered you my sword.

And as all my friends have gone to the battle, I should be ashamed to

stay behind.'

'But at
the least you shall ride with me to Edoras and look on Meduseld; for that way I shall go.

'This request only did Aragorn make to me,' said Éowyn,
as they passed among the tents, 'that you should be armed for battle.

'Take all these things,' she said, 'and
bear them to good fortune!

Behind him
Merry rode on Stybba with the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the
king's household.

He
caught the glint of clear grey eyes; and then he shivered, for it came suddenly to him that it was the
face of one without hope who goes in search of death.

From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning
with thane and captain rode Thengel's son:
to Edoras he came, the ancient halls
of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded;
golden timbers were in gloom mantled.

'And in such a
battle as we think to make on the fields of Gondor what would you do, Master Meriadoc,
sword-thain though you be, and greater of heart than of stature?'
'As for that, who can tell?' answered Merry. '

'You
wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark goes: I see it in your face.'
'I do,' said Merry.

'Then you shall go with me,' said the Rider.

Such good will should not be denied.

And then on again through the Folde; and
through the Fenmarch, where to their right great oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the hills under
the shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but away to their left the mists lay on the
marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash.

Chapter 4
The Siege of Gondor
Pippin was roused by Gandalf.

'Why did you bring me here?'

The esquire of my chamber has begged leave to go to the out -garrison, so
you shall take his place for a while.

Denethor turned to Gandalf, asking questions about the Rohirrim and their policies, and the position
of Éomer, the king's nephew.

'Go to the armouries
of the Citadel,' he said, 'and get you there the livery and gear of the Tower.

About the eleventh hour, released at last for a while from service, Pippin came out and went
in search of food and drink to cheer his heavy heart and make his task of waiting more supportable.

In the messes he met Beregond again, who had just come from an errand over the Pelennor out to
the Guard-towers upon the Causeway.

Already it seemed years to Pippin since he had sat there before, in some half-forgotten time
when he had still been a hobbit, a light-hearted wanderer touched little by the perils he had passed
through.

'You are weary of this day?' said Beregond.

And I'm not used, Master Beregond, to waiting hungry on others
while they eat.

But what is the good of such honour?

Indeed what is the good even of food and drink
under this creeping shadow?

Do you often
have such glooms when the wind is in the East?'
'Nay,' said Beregond, 'this is no weather of the world.

I think, not to find Faramir
here.

And where has he got to himself?

He left the Lord's council before the noon-meal, and in no
good mood either, I thought.

Pippin
cowered down with his hands pressed to his ears; but Beregond, who had been looking out from the
battlement as he spoke of Faramir, remained there, stiffened, staring out with starting eyes.

Pippin
knew the shuddering cry that he had heard: it was the same that he had heard long ago in the Marish
of the Shire, but now it was grown in power and hatred, piercing the heart with a poisonous despair.

At last Beregond spoke with an effort.

But see, Beregond!'

Gandalf save us!'

cried Beregond.

Help!

help!

Will no one go out
to him?

Faramir!'
With that Beregond sprang away and ran off into the gloom.

Ashamed of his terror, while
Beregond of the Guard thought first of the captain whom he loved, Pippin got up and peered out.

Go on!

Go on,
White Rider!

There he was joined
by many others who had watched the race and the rescue from the high walls.

Here was one with an air of high nobility such as Aragorn at times revealed, less high
perhaps, yet also less incalculable and remote: one of the Kings of Men born into a later time, but
touched with the wisdom and sadness of the Elder Race.

He knew now why Beregond spoke his
name with love.

At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with the travellers, and of their resolve
to go to Cirith Ungol, his voice fell, and he shook his head and sighed.

Then Gandalf sprang up.
'Cirith Ungol?

When would they reach that accursed valley?'
'I parted with them in the morning two days ago,' said Faramir.

'The morning of two days ago, nigh on three days of journey!

'But not with your death only, Lord Faramir: with the death also of
your father, and of all your people, whom it is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.'
'Do you wish then,' said Faramir, 'that our places had been exchanged?'
'Yes, I wish that indeed,' said Denethor.

On one occasion at least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago.

As now indeed I find.

Not used, I say, unless at the uttermost end of
need, but set beyond his grasp, save by a victory so final that what then befell would not trouble us,
being dead.'
'You think, as is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,' said Gandalf. '

And for me, I pity even his slaves.'
'And where will other men look for help, if Gondor falls?' answered Denethor.

You are strong and can still in some matters govern
yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing, it would have overthrown you.

It has gone into the Shadow, and
only time will show what doom awaits it and us.

'Then we will not,' said Denethor. 'Go now and rest as you may.

And when I heard of Cirith Ungol–––' He broke off and strode to
the window as if his eyes could pierce the night in the East. '

Cirith Ungol!'

And yet
in truth I believe that the news that Faramir brings has some hope in it.

'Maybe even your foolishness
helped, my lad.

Let me see: some five days ago now he would discover that we had thrown down
Saruman and had taken the Stone.

Aragorn?

'Only one but will I allow tonight.'
'Gollum,' said Pippin.

'How on earth could they be going about with him, even following
him?

Yet my heart guessed that Frodo and Gollum would
meet before the end.

For good, or for evil.

But of Cirith Ungol I will not speak tonight.

Let us remember that a
traitor may betray himself and do good that he does not intend.

Good night!

And now Faramir was gone again.

In truth Faramir did not go by his own choosing.

Since you are
robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what I can in his stead – if you command it.'
'I do so,' said Denethor.

So now the Lord Faramir had gone forth again, and had taken with him such strength of men
as were willing to go or could be spared.

At best the Red Arrow
cannot have reached him more than two days ago, and the miles are long from Edoras.'

They are coming!'
'Where is Faramir?' cried Beregond in dismay.

They were filled with wounded men, all that
could be saved from the wreck of the Causeway Forts.

He will not come save only to
triumph over me when all is won.

King of Angmar long ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgûl, a
spear of terror in the hand of Sauron, shadow of despair.'
'Then, Mithrandir, you had a foe to match you,' said Denethor.

Let us go down.'

Where are our own folk?'
It drew now to evening by the hour, and the light was so dim that even far-sighted men upon
the Citadel could discern little clearly out upon the fields, save only the burnings that ever
multiplied, and the lines of fire that grew in length and speed.

'He can govern man and
beast.

'Amroth for Gondor!'

But Denethor did not permit them to go far.

The cavalry of Gondor halted.

Only the charge of Dol Amroth had saved him
from the red southland swords that would have hewed him as he lay.

They were the remnant of the guard
that was kept at that point where the way from Anórien and Rohan ran into the townlands: Ingold
led them, the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin less than five days before, while the sun
still rose and there was hope in the morning.

It was his duty
to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, forgotten it seemed, standing by the door of the unlit
chamber, mastering his own fears as best he could.

So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the City of Gondor.

Men that saw them whispered saying: 'Belike the old tales speak well; there is
Elvish blood in the veins of that folk, for the people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago.'

And yet – when they had gone, the shadows closed on men again, and their hearts went cold,
and the valour of Gondor withered into ash.

But indeed there were too few now left there to do them great damage, though the light of
the fires showed up many a mark for archers of such skill as Gondor once had boasted.

Go back to your bonfire!

I will go now to my pyre.

Go back and burn!'

Go now, and die in what way seems
best to you.

Send
for my servants and then go.

All was silent, save for the rumour of war in the City down below, and they heard the water
dripping sadly from the dead branches into the dark pool.

Fen Hollen it was called, for it
was kept ever shut save at times of funeral, and only the Lord of the City might use that way, or
those who bore the token of the tombs and tended the houses of the dead.

Bring us wood quick to burn,
and lay it all about us, and beneath; and pour oil upon it.

'I must find Gandalf.

Oh, where can I find Gandalf?

'Go slow!

Bring no fire to this place while Faramir lives!

The sentinel hailed him as he went by, and he
recognized the voice of Beregond.
'Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?' he cried.

'To find Mithrandir,' Pippin answered.

'The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me,' said Beregond, 'but tell me
quickly, if you may: what goes forward?

Whither has my Lord gone?

Beregond bowed his head to hide his tears.

But the Lord
of the City, Beregond, has fallen before his city is taken.

'I must find Gandalf at once.'

'Then you must go down to the battle.'

But, Beregond, if you can, do something to stop any
dreadful thing happening.'
'The Lord does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave their post for any
cause, save at his own command.'
'Well, you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir,' said Pippin. '

Ever since the middle night the great assault had gone on.

Yet their Captain cared not greatly what they did or how
many might be slain: their purpose was only to test the strength of the defence and to keep the men
of Gondor busy in many places.

Upon its housing no fire would catch; and though now and again some
great beast that hauled it would go mad and spread stamping ruin among the orcs innumerable that
guarded it, their bodies were cast aside from its path and others took their place.

Then the Black Captain rose in his stirrups and cried aloud in a dreadful voice, speaking in
some forgotten tongue words of power and terror to rend both heart and stone.

And suddenly upon the last stroke the Gate of
Gondor broke.

All save one.

'Go back to the abyss
prepared for you!

Go back!

Go!'

Merry wished he was
a tall Rider like Éomer and could blow a horn or something and go galloping to his rescue.

They
go not to war with Gondor or the Mark; but now they are troubled by the darkness and the coming
of the orcs: they fear lest the Dark Years be returning, as seems likely enough.

Yonder go the lights.

He longed to know what was going to
happen.

He got up and soon was walking warily in pursuit of the last lantern before it disappeared
among the trees.

Here was one of those old images brought to life, or maybe a creature
descended in true line through endless years from the models used by the forgotten craftsmen long
ago.

There was a silence as Merry crept nearer, and then the Wild Man began to speak, in answer
to some question, it seemed.

Kill gorgun in woods, hate
orc-folk.

You hate gorgun too.

We help as we can.

'How will you and your folk help us?'
'Bring news,' said the Wild Man.

But gorgun and men out of far-away,' he waved a short gnarled arm eastward,
'sit on horse-road.

He will lead
you by road where no pits are, no gorgun walk, only Wild Men and beasts.

They go no
longer.

Road is forgotten, but not by Wild Men.

Then you will kill gorgun and drive away bad dark with bright iron, and
Wild Men can go back to sleep in the wild woods.'

If it is saved, then the orc-host itself will be
cut off.

He will go himself with father of
Horse-men, and if he leads you wrong, you will kill him.'

'We
must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and I doubt not the way is narrow.'
'Wild Men go quick on feet,' said Ghan. '

'Even so we cannot hope to come to
Gondor's aid today.'

The start had been slower than
was hoped, for it had taken time for the Riders, walking and leading their horses, to find paths over
the thickly wooded ridges behind their camp and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley.

Through the gap the forgotten wain-road long ago had run down, back into the main horse-way
from the City through Anórien; but now for many lives of men trees had had their way with it, and
it had vanished, broken and buried under the leaves of uncounted years.

Éomer sent out scouts to spy upon the road; but old Ghan shook
his head.
'No good to send Horse-men,' he said.

Walls stand up
no longer: gorgun knock them down with earth-thunder and with clubs of black iron.

'Good tidings!' cried Éomer.

And now, lusting to
destroy Gondor and throw it down stone from stone, his orcs have taken away my greatest fear.

'Good fortune go with
you for tidings and for guidance!'
'Kill gorgun !

Then he got up as if to depart.

On that stretch the errand-riders of Gondor
reckoned to make their greatest speed.

'Then since we must look for fell deeds and the need of all our strength,' said Éomer, 'I
counsel that we rest now, and set out hence by night, and so time our going that we come upon the
fields when tomorrow is as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.'

'The scouts
have found naught to report beyond the grey wood, lord,' he said, 'save two men only: two dead
men and two dead horses.'
'Well?' said Éomer.

'What of it?'
'This, lord: they were errand-riders of Gondor; Hirgon was one maybe.

As I read it, they found the enemy already on the
out-wall, or assailing it, when they returned – and that would be two nights ago, if they used fresh
horses from the posts, as is their wont.

'I live upon the open Wold in
days of peace; Widfara is my name, and to me also the air brings messages.

The
morning will bring new things.

You lead the first éored ,' said Théoden, 'and it shall go behind the king's
banner in the centre.

Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward into the field of Gondor, pouring in slowly but
steadily, like the rising tide through breaches in a dike that men have thought secure.

But the king sat upon Snowmane, motionless, gazing upon the
agony of Minas Tirith, as if stricken suddenly by anguish, or by dread.

Ride to Gondor!

Ride to Gondor!

Fey he seemed, or the battle-fury of his fathers ran like new tire in
his veins, and he was borne up on Snowmane like a god of old, even as Orome the Great in the

battle of the Valar when the world was young.

His golden shield was uncovered, and lo!

Chapter 6
The Battle of the Pelennor Fields
But it was no orc-chieftain or brigand that led the assault upon Gondor.

suddenly in the midst of the glory of the king his golden shield was dimmed.

A creature of an older
world maybe it was, whose kind, fingering in forgotten mountains cold beneath the Moon,
outstayed their day, and in hideous eyrie bred this last untimely brood, apt to evil.

A crown of steel he bore, but
between rim and robe naught was there to see, save only a deadly gleam of eyes: the Lord of the
Nazgûl.

To the air he had returned, summoning his steed ere the darkness failed, and now he was
come again, bringing ruin, turning hope to despair, and victory to death.

'Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion!

Begone, if you be not
deathless!

But the helm of her secrecy, had fallen from her, and
her bright hair, released from its bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon her shoulders.

For into Merry's mind flashed the memory of the face that
he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the face of one that goes seeking death, having no hope.

And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain, blinking like an owl in the
daylight, for tears blinded him; and through a mist he looked on Éowyn's fair head, as she lay and
did not move; and he looked on the face of the king, fallen in the midst of his glory, for Snowmane
in his agony had rolled away from him again; yet he was the bane of his master.

I go to my fathers.

A grim morn, and a glad
day, and a golden sunset!'

I go.

Merry looked round: he had forgotten the war,
and all the world beside, and many hours it seemed since the king rode to his fall, though in truth it
was only a little while.

Could he not have saved the king and Éowyn?'

They looked in
wonder at the carcase of the fell beast that lay there: and their steeds would not go near.

But glad would he have
been to know its fate who wrought it slowly long ago in the North-kingdom when the Dunedain
were young, and chief among their foes was the dread realm of Angmar and its sorcerer king.

But the men
of the king's household they could not yet bring from the field; for seven of the king's knights had
fallen there, and Deorwine their chief was among them.

And afterwards when all was over men returned and made a
fire there and burned the carcase of the beast; but for Snowmane they dug a grave and set up a stone
upon which was carved in the tongues of Gondor and the Mark:
Faithful servant yet master's bane
Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane.
Green and long grew the grass on Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and bare was the ground
where the beast was burned.

It was through a mist that presently he saw the van of the men of Gondor
approaching.

'Haste now is needed,' he said, and he sent one riding back swiftly to the City to bring aid.

Horns were blown and trumpets were
braying, and the mumakil were bellowing as they were goaded to war.

Under the south walls of the
City the footmen of Gondor now drove against the legions of Morgul that were still gathered there
in strength.

But wherever the mumakil came there the horses
would not go, but blenched and swerved away; and the great monsters were unfought, and stood
like towers of defence, and the Haradrim rallied about them.

There they had been mustered for the sack of the City
and the rape of Gondor, waiting on the call of their Captain.

He now was destroyed; but Gothmog
the lieutenant of Morgul had flung them into the fray; Easterlings with axes, and Variags of Khand.

Some now hastened up behind the Rohirrim, others held westward to hold off the forces of
Gondor and prevent their joining with Rohan.

It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope wavered that a new
cry went up in the City, it being then midmorning, and a great wind blowing, and the rain flying
north, and the sun shining.

So Belfalas is taken, and the Ethir, and Lebennin is gone.

There flowered a White Tree,
and that was for Gondor; but Seven Stars were about it, and a high crown above it, the signs of
Elendil that no lord had borne for years beyond count.

And the stars flamed in the sunlight, for they
were wrought of gems by Arwen daughter of Elrond; and the crown was bright in the morning, for
it was wrought of mithril and gold.

Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elessar, Isildur's heir, out of the Paths of the Dead, borne
upon a wind from the Sea to the kingdom of Gondor; and the mirth of the Rohirrim was a torrent of
laughter and a flashing of swords, and the joy and wonder of the City was a music of trumpets and a
ringing of bells.

There came Legolas, and Gimli wielding his axe, and
Halbarad with the standard, and Elladan and Elrohir with stars on their brow, and the dour-handed
Dunedain, Rangers of the North, leading a great valour of the folk of Lebennin and Lamedon and

the fiefs of the South.

But before all went Aragorn with the Flame of the West, Anduril like a new
fire kindled, Narsil re-forged as deadly as of old: and upon his brow was the Star of Elendil.

And so at length Éomer and Aragorn met in the midst of the battle, and they leaned on their
swords and looked on one another and were glad.

'Thus we meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor lay between us,' said Aragorn.

Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for, and never was a meeting of friends more joyful.'

said Aragorn, and they rode back to battle together.

And in that hour the great Battle of the field of Gondor was over;
and not one living foe was left within the circuit of the Rammas.

All were slain save those who fled
to die, or to drown in the red foam of the River.

Few ever came eastward to Morgul or Mordor; and
to the land of the Haradrim came only a tale from far off: a rumour of the wrath and terror of
Gondor.

Aragorn and Éomer and Imrahil rode back towards the Gate of the City, and they were now
weary beyond joy or sorrow.

There Théoden fell, Thengling mighty,
to his golden halls and green pastures
in the Northern fields never returning,
high lord of the host.

Harding and Guthláf
Dunhere and Deorwine, doughty Grimbold,
Herefara and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred,
fought and fell there in a far country:
in the Mounds of Mundburg under mould they lie
with their league-fellows, lords of Gondor.

Long now they sleep
under grass in Gondor by the Great River.

'I must go,' he said.

'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will
yet bring ruin on us.

Be quick!'
'Denethor has gone to the Tombs,' said Pippin, 'and he has taken Faramir, and he says we are
all to burn, and he will not wait, and they are to make a pyre and burn him on it, and Faramir as
well.

And I have told Beregond, but I'm afraid he won't
dare to leave his post: he is on guard.

'Can't you save Faramir?'
'Maybe I can,' said Gandalf, 'but if I do, then others will die, I fear.

Well, I must come, since
no other help can reach him.

The Rohirrim
are fighting on the fields of Gondor!

We must gather all the strength that we can find.'
'You will need every man and more,' said Gandalf. 'Make all haste.

'Then Beregond has gone,' said Pippin more
hopefully.

'For,
my friend,' he said, 'you and I should have ridden to the fields long ago, but other matters delay me.

For there were the servants of Denethor with swords and torches in their hands; but alone in
the porch upon the topmost step stood Beregond, clad in the black and silver of the Guard; and he
held the door against them.

Thereupon the door which Beregond held shut with his left hand was wrenched open,
and there behind him stood the Lord of the City, tall and fell; a light like flame was in his eyes, and
he held a drawn sword.

Or has our
Enemy come even to Rath Dínen?'
'Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee?' said Denethor.

It shall all go up in a great fire, and all shall be ended.

Then Gandalf seeing the madness that was on him feared that he had already done some evil
deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin behind him, while Denethor gave back until
he stood beside the table within.

He leaped up on to the faggots, and raising the sick man lightly he sprang down again, and
bore him towards the door.

For he must seek healing on the
threshold of death, and maybe find it not.

Whereas your part is to go out to the battle of your City,
where maybe death awaits you.

Why should we not go to death side by side?'
'Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of your death,' answered
Gandalf. '

Go then and
labour in healing!

Go forth and fight!

With the left hand thou wouldst use me for a little while as a
shield against Mordor, and with the right bring up this Ranger of the North to supplant me.

But Beregond sprang forward and set himself before Faramir.

Then he turned to Beregond and the
Lord's servants that stood there aghast.

'And so pass also the days of Gondor that you have known;
for good or evil they are ended.

But think, you servants of the Lord, blind
in your obedience, that but for the treason of Beregond Faramir, Captain of the White Tower, would
now also be burned.

And we will bear
Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to a place where he can sleep in peace, or die if that be his doom.'

Then Gandalf and Beregond taking up the bier bore it away towards the Houses of Healing,
while behind them walked Pippin with downcast head.

At length they came back to the Steward's Door, and Beregond looked with grief at the porter.

But Gandalf's face was grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and Pippin to take Faramir into
the Houses of Healing, he went up on to the walls nearby; and there like a figure carven in white he
stood in the new sun and looked out.

And
Beregond and Pippin found him standing in thought before the door of the Houses when they came
out.

But he has not gone without woe and bitter loss.

'Though the Stewards deemed that it was a secret kept only by themselves, long ago I guessed
that here in the White Tower, one at least of the Seven Seeing Stones was preserved.

'The Lord went away from the room where Faramir lay; and it was only when he returned
that I first thought he was changed, old and broken.'
'It was in the very hour that Faramir was brought to the Tower that many of us saw a strange
light in the topmost chamber,' said Beregond.

'Now I must go down to meet those who come.

But you,
Beregond, should return to the Citadel and tell the chief of the Guard there what has befallen.

For by you he was saved from the fire.

Go
now!

Gently they laid Éowyn upon soft pillows; but the king's body they
covered with a great cloth of gold, and they bore torches about him, and their flames, pale in the
sunlight, were fluttered by the wind.

So Théoden and Éowyn came to the City of Gondor, and all who saw them bared their heads
and bowed; and they passed through the ash and fume of the burned circle, and went on and up
along the streets of stone.

To Merry the ascent seemed agelong, a meaningless journey in a hateful
dream, going on and on to some dim ending that memory cannot seize.

Thank goodness

'They have gone up into the Citadel,' said Pippin.

Help me, Pippin!

It's all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.'
'Lean on me, Merry lad!' said Pippin.

It's not far.'
'Are you going to bury me?' said Merry.

No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.'

'Is there no one to help me?

Just then to his surprise a boy came running up behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil
Beregond's son.
'Hullo, Bergil!'

'Where are you going?

It was not long before Gandalf himself came in search of them.

For though all lore was in these latter days fallen from its fullness of
old, the leechcraft of Gondor was still wise, and skilled in the healing of wound and hurt, and all
such sickness as east of the Sea mortal men were subject to.

Save old age only.

For that they had
found no cure; and indeed the span of their lives had now waned to little more than that of other
men, and those among them who passed the tale of five score years with vigour were grown few,
save in some houses of purer blood.

Still at whiles as the morning
wore away they would speak, murmuring in their dreams; and the watchers listened to all that they
said, hoping perhaps to learn something that would help them to understand their hurts.

And so the day passed, while the great battle outside went on with shifting hopes and strange
tidings; and still Gandalf waited and watched and did not go forth; till at last the red sunset filled all
the sky, and the light through the windows fell on the grey faces of the sick.

Would
that there were kings in Gondor, as there were once upon a time, they say!

Maybe a king has indeed returned to Gondor; or have you not heard the strange
tidings that have come to the City?'
'I have been too busy with this and that to heed all the crying and shouting,' she answered.

Now as the sun went down Aragorn and Éomer and Imrahil drew near the City with their
captains and knights; and when they came before the Gate Aragorn said:
'Behold the Sun setting in a great fire!

Will you suffer these to be challenged?'
'No,' said Aragorn.

Yet I would not have you remain like a beggar at the
door.'
'Not a beggar,' said Aragorn.

But they found his chair empty, and before the dais lay Théoden King of the Mark
upon a bed of state; and twelve torches stood about it, and twelve guards, knights both of Rohan and
Gondor.

And the hangings of the bed were of green and white, but upon the king was laid the great
cloth of gold up to his breast, and upon that his unsheathed sword, and at his feet his shield, The
light of the torches shimmered in his white hair like sun in the spray of a fountain, but his face was
fair and young, save that a peace lay on it beyond the reach of youth; and it seemed that he slept.

And one of the guards answered: 'The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses of Healing.'

But Imrahil said: 'So victory is shorn of gladness, and it is bitter bought, if both Gondor and
Rohan are in one day bereft of their lords.

Shall we not send now for the Lord Aragorn?'

And they saw as he stepped into the light
of the lantern by the door that it was Aragorn, wrapped in the grey cloak of Lórien above his mail,
and bearing no other token than the green stone of Galadriel.

For it is
only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope remains for the sick that lie in the House.

Thus spake
Ioreth, wise-woman of Gondor: The hands of the king are the hands of a healer, and so shall the

rightful king be known .'

Then Aragorn entered first and the others followed.

Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand.

And Aragorn hearing him, turned and said: 'Verily, for in the high tongue of old I am Elessar ,
the Elfstone , and Envinyatar , the Renewer': and he lifted from his breast the green stone that lay
there.

Aragorn went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady Éowyn, and last to Merry.

But Aragorn answered: 'Nay, for these three, and most soon for Faramir, time is running out.

But I am sure I
do not know where we shall find more; for all things are amiss in these dreadful days, what with
fires and burnings, and the lads that run errands so few, and all the roads blocked.

But we do our best in this
House with what we have, as I am sure your lordship will know.'
'I will judge that when I see,' said Aragorn.

I will go and ask of
the herb-master; he knows all the old names.'
'It is also called kingsfoil ,' said Aragorn, 'and maybe you know it by that name, for so the
country-folk call it in these latter days.

If sweet is the right word:
wholesome, maybe, is nearer.'
'Wholesome verily,' said Aragorn.

When Ioreth was gone, Aragorn bade the other women to make water hot.

It was drenched with sweat;
but Faramir did not move or make any sign, and seemed hardly to breathe.
'He is nearly spent,' said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. '

How then do you read the matter?'
'Weariness, grief for his father's mood, a wound, and over all the Black Breath,' said Aragorn.

'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil, as the rustics name it,
he said; or athelas in the noble tongue, or to those who know somewhat of the Valinorean...'
'I do so,' said Aragorn, 'and I care not whether you say now asea aranion or kingsfoil , so
long as you have some.'

For it has no virtue that we know of, save perhaps to sweeten a fouled air, or to drive away
some passing heaviness.

Unless, of course, you give heed to rhymes of old days which women such
as our good Ioreth still repeat without understanding.

But old folk still use an infusion of the herb for headaches.'
'Then in the name of the king, go and find some old man of less lore and more wisdom who
keeps some in his house!' cried Gandalf.

Now Aragorn knelt beside Faramir, and held a hand upon his brow.

And those that watched
felt that some great struggle was going on.

For Aragorn's face grew grey with weariness; and ever
and anon he called the name of Faramir, but each time more faintly to their hearing, as if Aragorn
himself was removed from them, and walked afar in some dark vale, calling for one that was lost.

It must have been culled two weeks ago at the least.

But Aragorn smiled.

But Aragorn stood up as one refreshed, and his eyes smiled as he held a bowl before
Faramir's dreaming face.
'Well now!

Suddenly Faramir stirred, and he opened his eyes, and he looked on Aragorn who bent over
him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in his eyes, and he spoke softly. '

said Aragorn.

'For who would lie idle when the king has returned?'
'Farewell then for a while!' said Aragorn.

'I must go to others who need me.'

And he left the
chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil; but Beregond and his son remained behind, unable to contain
their joy.

And soon the word
had gone out from the House that the king was indeed come among them, and after war he brought
healing; and the news ran through the City.

But Aragorn came to Éowyn, and he said: 'Here there is a grievous hurt and a heavy blow.

But that did not bring her to this pass!'
'My friend,' said Gandalf, 'you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the free fields; but she,
born in the body of a maid, had a spirit and courage at least the match of yours.

But Aragorn said: 'I saw also what you saw, Éomer.

And if to despair, then she will die,
unless other healing comes which I cannot bring.

Then Aragorn stooped and looked in her face, and it was indeed white as a lily, cold as frost,
and hard as graven stone.

Once more Aragorn bruised two leaves of athelas and cast
them into steaming water; and he laved her brow with it, and her right arm lying cold and nerveless
on the coverlet.

Then, whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten power of Westernesse, or whether it was
but his words of the Lady Éowyn that wrought on them, as the sweet influence of the herb stole
about the chamber it seemed to those who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and
it bore no scent, but was an air wholly fresh and clean and young, as if it had not before been
breathed by any living thing and came new-made from snowy mountains high beneath a dome of
stars, or from shores of silver far away washed by seas of foam.

'Awake, Éowyn, Lady of Rohan!' said Aragorn again, and he took her right hand in his and
felt it warm with life returning.

The shadow is gone and all darkness is washed clean!'

He lies
now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.'
'That is grievous,' she said.

And yet it is good beyond all that I dared hope in the dark days,
when it seemed that the House of Eorl was sunk in honour less than any shepherd's cot.

'He lies nearby in this House, and I will go to him,' said Gandalf.

Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there they found Aragorn standing by the bed.

'Do not be afraid,' said Aragorn.

Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry's head, and passing his hand gently through the brown
curls, he touched the eyelids, and called him by name.

What is the time?'
'Past supper-time now,' said Pippin, 'though I daresay I could bring you something, if they will
let me.'
'They will indeed,' said Gandalf. '

And anything else that this Rider of Rohan may desire, if it
can be found in Minas Tirith, where his name is in honour.'
'Good!' said Merry.

said Aragorn.

I had some of Saruman's best in my pack, but what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don't
know.'
'Master Meriadoc,' said Aragorn, 'if you think that I have passed through the mountains and
the realm of Gondor with fire and sword to bring herbs to a careless soldier who throws away his
gear, you are mistaken.

And he will tell you that he did not know that the herb you desire had any virtues, but
that it is called westmansweed by the vulgar, and galenas by the noble, and other names in other
tongues more learned, and after adding a few half-forgotten rhymes that he does not understand, he
will regretfully inform you that there is none in the House, and he will leave you to reflect on the
history of tongues.

'Go at once!

'I know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way,' said Aragorn.

Aragorn and Gandalf went now to the Warden of the Houses of Healing, and they counselled
him that Faramir and Éowyn should remain there and still be tended with care for many days.
'The Lady Éowyn,' said Aragorn, 'will wish soon to rise and depart; but she should not be
permitted to do so, if you can in any way restrain her, until at least ten days be passed.'
'As for Faramir,' said Gandalf, 'he must soon learn that his father is dead.

See
that Beregond and the perian who were present do not speak to him of these things yet!'

'It is likely that he will be fit to arise tomorrow, for a short while,' said Aragorn.

At the doors of the Houses many were already gathered to see Aragorn, and they followed
after him; and when at last he had supped, men came and prayed that he would heal their kinsmen
or their friends whose lives were in peril through hurt or wound, or who lay under the Black

Shadow.

And Aragorn arose and went out, and he sent for the sons of Elrond, and together they
laboured far into the night.

Legolas and Gimli were early abroad, and they begged leave to go up into the
City; for they were eager to see Merry and Pippin.

'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli, 'for they cost us great pains in our
march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains all wasted.'

Together the Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw them pass marvelled to
see such companions; for Legolas was fair of face beyond the measure of Men, and he sang an
elven-song in a clear voice as he walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked beside him, stroking his
beard and staring about him.

'There is some good stone-work here,' he said as he looked at the walls, 'but also some that is
less good, and the streets could be better contrived.

When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer
him the service of stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.'
'They need more gardens,' said Legolas.

If Aragorn comes into his own, the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that
sing and trees that do not die.'

At length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and Legolas looked at him and bowed low; for he
saw that here indeed was one who had elven-blood in his veins.

What do you seek?'
'I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir from Imladris,' said Legolas,
'and with this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord Aragorn.

Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are in your keeping, we are told.'
'You will find them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you thither,' said Imrahil.

'It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord,' said Legolas.

'For Aragorn sends this
message to you.

'That is a fair lord and a great captain of men,' said Legolas.

'If Gondor has such men still in
these days of fading, great must have been its glory in the days of its rising.'

'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought in the first building,' said
Gimli.

'It is ever so with the things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring, or a blight in Summer,
and they fail of their promise.'
'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,' said Legolas.

'To that the Elves know not the answer,' said Legolas.

Then when Merry became weary, they went and sat upon the wall with the
greensward of the Houses of Healing behind them; and away southward before them was the
Anduin glittering in the sun, as it flowed away, out of the sight even of Legolas, into the wide flats
and green haze of Lebennin and South Ithilien.

And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out against the sun, and as
he gazed he saw white sea-birds beating up the River.

'You must not go to the Havens, Legolas.

You and Legolas have mentioned your
strange journey with Strider about a dozen times already this morning.

'I heard Aragorn say that

But neither did I prove;
and I was held to the road only by the will of Aragorn.'
'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas.

ere you came there, Merry, that we left Dunharrow, and such a fear was on all the folk that none
would look on our going, save the Lady Éowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below.

He fell silent; but Pippin and Merry were so eager for news that at last Legolas said: 'I will tell
you enough for your peace; for I felt not the horror, and I feared not the shadows of Men, powerless
and frail as I deemed them.'

In the uplands of Lamedon they overtook our horses, and swept
round us, and would have passed us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them.

Only Angbor, Lord of Lamedon, had the heart to abide us; and
Aragorn bade him gather his folk and come behind, if they dared, when the Grey Host had passed.

But soon Aragorn arose, saying: “Lo! already Minas Tirith is assailed.

Legolas paused and sighed, and turning his eyes southward softly he sang:

In the wind from the Sea
The white lilies sway,
And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin
In the green fields of Lebennin,

'But Aragorn halted and cried with a great voice: “Now come!

Faint cries I heard, and dim horns blowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices:
it was like the echo of some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago.

'To every ship they came that was drawn up, and then they passed over the water to those that
were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with a madness of terror and leaped overboard, save
the slaves chained to the oars.

And then to each of the great ships that remained Aragorn sent one of
the Dunedain, and they comforted the captives that were aboard, and bade them put aside fear and
be free.
'Ere that dark day ended none of the enemy were left to resist us all were drowned, or were
flying south in the hope to find their own lands upon foot.

With its own
weapons was it worsted!'
'Strange indeed,' said Legolas.

'In that hour I looked on Aragorn and thought how great and
terrible a Lord he might have become in the strength of his will, had he taken the Ring to himself.

'But mighty indeed was
Aragorn that day.

There they stood silent, hardly to be seen, save for a
red gleam in their eyes that caught the glare of the ships that were burning.

And Aragorn spoke in a
loud voice to the Dead Men, crying:
'“Hear now the words of the Heir of Isildur!

Go back and trouble not the
valleys ever again!

For there were many captives set free, and many
slaves released who had been folk of Gondor taken in raids; and soon also there was a great
gathering of men out of Lebennin and the Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came up with all the
horsemen that he could muster.

But still Aragorn was
driven by fear that time was too short.

“Yet to the
Harlond we must come tomorrow or fail utterly.”
'The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they laboured; yet slowly we passed
up the Great River, for we strove against its stream, and though that is not swift down in the South,
we had no help of wind.

Heavy would my heart have been, for all our victory at the havens, if
Legolas had not laughed suddenly.

When night came it did but deepen
the darkness, and our hearts were hot, for away in the North we saw a red glow under the cloud, and
Aragorn said: “Minas Tirith is burning.”

It was a great day and a great hour, whatever may come after.'
'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas.

'Great deed was the
riding of the Paths of the Dead, and great it shall remain, though none be left in Gondor to sing of it
in the days that are to come.'
'And that may well befall,' said Gimli.

'For the faces of Aragorn and Gandalf are grave.

Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for the
honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'
'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love of the Lord of the White
Tree.'

When the Prince Imrahil had parted from Legolas and Gimli, at once he sent for Éomer; and
he went down with him from the City, and they came to the tents of Aragorn that were set up on the
field not far from the place where King Théoden had fallen.

And there they took counsel together

with Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons of Elrond.

'My lords,' said Gandalf, 'listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor before he died: You
may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but against the Power that has now arisen
there is no victory .

For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown yourself to him in the
Stone of Orthanc?'
'I did

so ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered Aragorn.

'As Aragorn has begun, so we must go on.

At length Aragorn spoke.

'As I have begun, so I will go on.

But for
him all would long ago have been lost.

This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend Aragorn succoured me and my people, so I will aid
him when he calls.

I will go.'
'As for me,' said Imrahil, 'the Lord Aragorn I hold to be my liege-lord, whether he claim it or
no.

I will go also.

Yet for a while I stand in the place of the Steward
of Gondor, and it is mine to think first of its people.

For
we must prepare against all chances, good as well as evil.

Now, it may be that we shall triumph, and
while there is any hope of this, Gondor must be protected.

And they must be hardy men that
go willingly, knowing their peril.'
'All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous,' said Éomer, 'and we have
suffered much loss of our horses, and that is ill to bear.

If we must ride soon, then I cannot hope to
lead even two thousands, and yet leave as many for the defence of the City.'
'We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this field,' said Aragorn.

Four thousands I sent
marching from Pelargir through Lossarnach two days ago; and Angbor the fearless rides before
them.

I judge that we could lead out
seven thousands of horse and foot, and yet leave the City in better defence than it was when the
assault began.'

'The Gate is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill to rebuild it and set it up
anew?'
'In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dain there is such skill,' said Aragorn, 'and if all our hopes do
not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Glóin's son to ask for wrights of the Mountain.

This then was the end of the debate of the lords: that they should set forth on the second
morning from that day with seven thousands, if these might be found; and the great part of this
force should be on foot, because of the evil lands into which they would go.

Aragorn should find
some two thousands of those that he had gathered to him in the South; but Imrahil should find three
and a half thousands; and Éomer five hundreds of the Rohirrim who were unhorsed but themselves
warworthy, and he himself should lead five hundreds of his best Riders on horse; and another
company of five hundred horse there should be, among which should ride the sons of Elrond with
the Dunedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot and a thousand horse.

'Surely,' he cried, 'this is the greatest jest in all the history of Gondor: that we should ride with
seven thousands, scarce as many as the vanguard of its army in the days of its power, to assail the
mountains and the impenetrable gate of the Black Land!

'Neither shall we,' said Aragorn.

Nay, it is the
last move in a great jeopardy, and for one side or the other it will bring the end of the game.'

Book VI
Chapter 1
The Tower of Cirith Ungol
Sam roused himself painfully from the ground.

He no longer had any doubt about his duty: he must
rescue his master or perish in the attempt.

He was in a land of
darkness where the days of the world seemed forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten
too.

And even now Aragorn was leading the black fleet
from Pelargir, and Merry was riding with the Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in Minas
Tirith flames were rising and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor.

They
were not forgotten.

But they were far beyond aid, and no thought could yet bring any help to
Samwise Hamfast's son; he was utterly alone.

His fear of the orcs, forgotten for a
while in his wrath and desperation, now returned.

As far as he could see, there was only one
possible course for him to take: he must go on and try to find the main entrance to the dreadful
tower; but his knees felt weak, and he found that he was trembling.

Drawing his eyes down from the
tower and the horns of the Cleft before him, he forced his unwilling feet to obey him, and slowly,
listening with all his ears, peering into the dense shadows of the rocks beside the way, he retraced
his steps, past the place where Frodo fell, and still the stench of Shelob lingered, and then on and
up, until he stood again in the very cleft where he had put on the Ring and seen Shagrat's company
go by.

Immediately he felt the great burden of its weight, and felt
afresh, but now more strong and urgent than ever, the malice of the Eye of Mordor, searching,
trying to pierce the shadows that it had made for its own defence, but which now hindered it in its
unquiet and doubt.

There was plainly some devilry going on.

There could not be much doubt: there was fighting in the tower, the orcs must be at war among
themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to blows.

'No good blundering about in a fog!'
Hard and cruel and bitter was the land that met his gaze.

Some would flow blazing towards Barad-dur down great channels; some
would wind their way into the stony plain, until they cooled and lay like twisted dragon-shapes
vomited from the tormented earth.

In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his left, he could see the Tower of
Cirith Ungol in all its strength.

Then on it went through a
jagged rift in the Morgai out into the valley of Gorgoroth and away to Barad-dur.

It was indeed one of the works of
Gondor long ago, an eastern outpost of the defences of Ithilien, made when, after the Last Alliance,
Men of Westernesse kept watch on the evil land of Sauron where his creatures still lurked.

And even if he did so, he could not go far on the
guarded road beyond: not even the black shadows, lying deep where the red glow could not reach,
would shield him long from the night-eyed orcs.

As it drew near the great furnaces where, in the deeps of time, it had been shaped and
forged, the Ring's power grew, and it became more fell, untameable save by some mighty will.

And then all the clouds rolled away, and the white sun shone, and at his
command the vale of Gorgoroth became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit.

In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to hold him firm; but also
deep down in him lived still unconquered his plain hobbit-sense: he knew in the core of his heart
that he was not large enough to bear such a burden, even if such visions were not a mere cheat to
betray him.

And if ever I get any further, it's going to be nothing but a drag
and a burden every step.

He knew that he must go down to the gate and not linger any
more.

He had not gone far before he had
shrunk again to a very small and frightened hobbit.

He crept on; and as he went he wondered how many orcs lived in the Tower with Shagrat, and

how many Gorbag had, and what they were quarrelling about, if that was what was happening.

Shagrat's company had seemed to be about forty, and Gorbag's more than twice as large; but of
course Shagrat's patrol had only been a part of his garrison.

Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and
they would find it.

And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it.

Many doors
and openings could be seen on this side and that; but it was empty save for two or three more bodies
sprawling on the floor.

From what he had heard of the captains' talk Sam knew that, dead or alive,
Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber high up in the turret far above; but he might search
for a day before he found the way.

There was no sound save the rap of his feet, which seemed to grow to
an echoing noise, like the slapping of great hands upon the stones.

He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits had risen a good deal.

And anyway it looks as if Shagrat,
Gorbag, and company have done nearly all my job for me.

It was dark save for an occasional torch flaring at a turn, or beside some
opening that led into the higher levels of the Tower.

'You won't go again, you say?

Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot!

'I've told you twice
that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, and none of ours got out.

'Then you must go.

The Black Pits take that filthy rebel
Gorbag!'

'I gave him better than I
got, but he knifed me, the dung, before I throttled him.

You must go, or I'll eat you.

'I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, 'be you captain or no.

You won't be a captain long when they hear
about all these goings-on.

It was Gorbag started it, trying to
pinch that pretty shirt.'
'Well, you put his back up, being so high and mighty.

Gorbag was right, I tell you.

He's got past the Watchers, and that's tark's work.

And until he's
off them, I'm not going down.

I'll put red maggot-holes in your belly first.'
Out of the turret-door the smaller orc came flying.

Going to the parapet he leaned over, looking down into the outer court far below.

Quick as a snake Shagrat slipped aside, twisted round, and drove his knife into
his enemy's throat.
'Got you, Gorbag!'

Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far.

Soon the thought of Frodo returned to him,
and he remembered that the other orc had gone back into the turret.

If Shagrat got away, he would soon get help and come back.

'But it's my job to go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.'

If Sam could have seen him and known the grief that his escape would
bring, he might have quailed.

But now his mind was set on the last stage of his search.

It came from an opening that led to another stairway,
dark and narrow: it appeared to go winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall.

The door was open, the passage dark save for the glimmer of the
torch and the red glare from outside filtering through the window-slit.

You've not got long to live in peace, I guess; but if you don't
want the fun to begin right now, keep your trap shut, see?

I couldn't find you.'
'Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam,' said Frodo, and he lay back in Sam's gentle arms,
closing his eyes, like a child at rest when night-fears are driven away by some loved voice or hand.

It was not
enough for him to find his master, he had still to try and save him.

But you're in the
top of that tower you and me saw from away down by the tunnel before the orcs got you.

How long
ago that was I don't know.

They stripped me
of everything; and then two great brutes came and questioned me, questioned me until I thought I
should go mad, standing over me, gloating, fingering their knives.

And if we don't want to see them
again, the sooner we get going the better.

You can't go walking in the Black Land in naught but your skin,
Mr. Frodo.'
'They've taken everything, Sam,' said Frodo.

'The quest has failed Sam.

'You've got it?' gasped Frodo.

'You've got it here?

You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to
bear.

But I
can still help, can't I?

I've got to get you out of here.

If we go together, we'd best match.

I've got them both still.

I must go and see what I can find.

I shan't have to go far.'
'Take care, Sam!' said Frodo. '

There may be orcs still alive, lurking in wait.'
'I've got to chance it,' said Sam.

Then
he got up, drew the grey elven-cloak about him, and to keep his mind occupied, began to walk to
and fro, prying and peering into every corner of his prison.

'I've had a bit of a search to find anything small enough for
the likes of us.

Frodo looked in disgust at the contents, but there was nothing for it: he
had to put the things on, or go naked.

'The Morgul-stuff, Gorbag's gear, was a better fit and better made,' said Sam; 'but it wouldn't
do, I guess, to go carrying his tokens into Mordor, not after this business here.

You can pick up a

shield as we go.'

'Aren't we going to match?'
'Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best not leave any of my stuff behind, and
we can't destroy it.

And now we must be off!'
'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile.

Or have you forgotten about food and drink?'
'Save me, but so I had!' said Sam.

'Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but you've
gone and made me that hungry and thirsty!

I'd forgotten it, trying to find you.

Last time I looked I'd got about enough of that
waybread, and of what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep me on my legs for a couple of weeks at a
pinch.

That's not going to be enough for two,
nohow.

But I guess they disliked the very look and smell of the
lembas , worse than Gollum did.

It's not far short of what you've got.

But they've taken Faramir's food, and
they've slashed up my water-bottle.'
'Well, there's no more to be said,' said Sam. 'We've got enough to start on.

But the water's
going to be a bad business.

Off we go, or a whole lake of it won't do us any
good!'
'Not till you've had a mouthful, Sam,' said Frodo.

The whole thing is quite hopeless, so it's no good worrying
about tomorrow.

All might be dead in the Tower of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped in fear and evil still.

'I can't go on, Sam,' he
murmured.

'I'm going to faint.

But I got through, and
I'm going to get out.

Away
behind them, now high above on the mountain-side, loomed the Tower of Cirith Ungol, its stones
glowing dully.

Over we go!'

Fortunately there was no longer any dreadful drop into the gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had
already risen almost to the level of the road; but it was too dark for them to guess the depth of the
fall.
'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. '

Good-bye!'

He let go.

These thorns must be a foot long by the feel of them; they've stuck through everything I've got
on.

'Not even a leather jerkin is any good.

'Now down we go, Sam,' Frodo whispered.

Slowly and painfully they
clambered down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and dead wood in the blind
shadows, down and down until they could go no further.

At last with a struggle he got up again.

'It's no good, Sam,' he said.

That Gollum
isn't dead, for one thing.

But I have to go
on trying to get to the Mountain, as long as I can move.

It must go.

I hate to think of the foul work you must have
had among the bodies to find it for me.'

'Don't talk about it, Mr. Frodo.

Let it go then!'

'It's gone cold, or else I've caught a chill.'
'You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam.

Then this can go over all.

I can
go on now.

They had not gone far when Frodo paused.

I wish I could
see what is going on!'

"The war's going well," said
Shagrat; but Gorbag he wasn't so sure.

Haven't you got some hope now?'
'Well no, not much, Sam,' Frodo sighed.

We're going east
not west.

'I've got one thing I wanted: a bit of light.

Enough to help us, and
yet I guess it's dangerous too.

It was used by patrols or by
messengers going swiftly to lesser posts and strongholds north-away, between Cirith Ungol and the
narrows of Isenmouthe, the iron jaws of Carach Angren.

The road east to the plain, or the pass back westward, those they would first search most
thoroughly.

'I have just about enough strength left to find some
hole away up there.

The sullen shrivelled leaves of a past year hung on them, grating
and rattling in the sad airs, but their maggot-ridden buds were only just opening.

'Orc-gear's no good,' said Sam, waving his arms.

'I wish I'd got an orc's hide!'

At last Frodo could go no further.

They had climbed up a narrow shelving ravine, but they still
had a long way to go before they could even come in sight of the last craggy ridge.

Beyond the Morgai
there was the dreadful plain of Gorgoroth to cross.

'Now you go to sleep first, Mr. Frodo,' he said.

After much wandering and search they found a way that they could climb, and with a last
hundred feet of clawing scramble they were up.

The wind of the world blew now from the West, and the great clouds
were lifted high, floating away eastward; but still only a grey light came to the dreary fields of
Gorgoroth.

About it the ground
was busy with folk going to and fro; a wide road ran from it south-east to join the Morgul-way, and
along it many lines of small black shapes were hurrying.

Neither he nor Frodo knew anything of the great slave-worked fields away south in this wide
realm, beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark sad waters of Lake Nurnen; nor of the great
roads that ran away east and south to tributary lands, from which the soldiers of the Tower brought
long waggon-trains of goods and booty and fresh slaves.

For the moment it
withdrew them, and brought up new forces, massing them about Cirith Gorgor for an avenging
stroke.

But I've still got to do the best I can.

So we must still go northwards, I think, and see what it is like
where the open plain is narrower.'

In the end they
were forced to go back down the ravine that they had climbed and seek for a way along the valley.

It was rough going, for they dared not cross over to the path on the westward side.

'I'm going home.'

No good wearing my nose out on
stones any more.

And some of the bosses are
going to lose their skins too, I guess, if what I hear is true: Tower raided and all, and hundreds of
your lads done in, and prisoner got away.

If that's the way you fighters go on, small wonder there's
bad news from the battles.'

'I'll say no more and go on thinking.

But what's the black
sneak got to do with it all?

That gobbler with the flapping hands?'
'I don't know.

But he's up to no good, nosing around, I'll wager.

He messed up the
scent back there, pinching that cast-off mail-shirt that he found, and paddling all round the place
before I could get there.'
'It saved his life anyhow,' said the soldier.

Go to your filthy

Shriekers, and may they freeze the flesh off you!

'Did you
hear what they said about that gobbler , Mr. Frodo?

I told you Gollum wasn't dead yet, didn't I?'
'Yes, I remember.

I think we
had better not move out from here again, until it has gone quite dark.

There the hobbits sat under the cover of the thorny bush, while the drear light of Mordor
faded slowly into a deep and starless night; and Sam spoke into Frodo's ear all that he could find
words for of Gollum's treacherous attack, the horror of Shelob, and his own adventures with the
orcs.

Well, I suppose we must be going on again,' he said.

I have got an
orc-blade, but I do not think it will be my part to strike any blow again.'

At last when Frodo roused himself and spoke of eating and
making ready for yet another effort, he asked the question that was troubling him most.

'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, 'but have you any notion how far there is still to
go?'
'No, not any clear notion, Sam,' Frodo answered.

It might be a good point at which to cross.

I guess that we have
gone about twelve leagues north from the bridge now.

Even if all goes well, I could hardly reach the
Mountain in a week.

I am afraid, Sam, that the burden will get very heavy, and I shall go still slower
as we get nearer.'

'Well, to say nothing of water, we've got to eat
less, Mr. Frodo, or else move a bit quicker, at any rate while we're still in this valley.

One more bite
and all the food's ended, save the Elves' waybread.'
'I'll try and be a bit quicker, Sam,' said Frodo, drawing a deep breath.

The trough between the mountains and the Morgai
had steadily dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more than a shelf in
the steep faces of the Ephel Duath; but to the east it fell as sheerly as ever down into Gorgoroth.

'If we go on, we shall only come up to that
orc-tower, but the only road to take is that road that comes down from it – unless we go back.

We might as well give ourselves up as wander about any more, or try to
go back.

We've got to make a dash for it!'
'All right, Sam,' said Frodo.

As long as you've got any hope left.

Mine is gone.

Well, here goes, Master!'

Sam crept out, and flitting from stone to stone with more than hobbit-care, he went down to
the water-course, and then followed it for some way as it climbed north, until he came to the
rock-steps where long ago, no doubt, its spring had come gushing down in a little waterfall.

Sam tasted the water, and it seemed good enough.

Then he drank deeply, refilled the bottle,
and turned to go back.

He sat down by Frodo and did not rouse him; but he did not dare to go to sleep himself.

At
last when he felt his eyes closing and knew that his struggle to keep awake could not go on much
longer, he wakened Frodo gently.

'That Gollum's about again, I'm afraid, Mr. Frodo,' he said.

I went away to find some water and spied him nosing round just as I turned
back.

But I'd rather have Gollum
than orcs.

We can fill it again when we go on.'

There was no sign of Gollum.

The orcs were going at a great pace.

Now more
than half the line had gone by.

On, on they went, and
he bent all his will to draw his breath and to make his legs keep going; and yet to what evil end he
toiled and endured he did not dare to think.

Do you good.

Don't you know we're at war?'
They had gone some miles, and the road was at last running down a long slope into the plain,
when Frodo's strength began to give out and his will wavered.

Desperately Sam tried to help him and hold him up, though he felt that he could himself hardly stay
the pace much longer.

It was too dark to seek for cover, if indeed there was any to find; but
Sam felt that they ought at least to get further away from the highways and out of the range of
torch-light.

Out of the north from the
Black Gate through Cirith Gorgor there flowed whispering along the ground a thin cold air.

But the bitter truth came home to him at last:
at best their provision would take them to their goal; and when the task was done, there they would
come to an end, alone, houseless, foodless in the midst of a terrible desert.

'So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started,' thought Sam, 'to help Mr. Frodo to the
last step and then die with him?

But I would dearly like to
see Bywater again, and Rosie Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer and Marigold and all.

Indeed the whole surface
of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes, as if, while it was still a waste of soft mud,
it had been smitten with a shower of bolts and huge slingstones.

For the hungry
and worn, who had far to go before life failed, it had an evil look.

Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind such cover as they

could find, but moving always in a slant towards the foothills of the northern range.

The hobbits had gone a few weary miles when they halted.

Sam
saw that he could not go much further in this fashion, crawling, stooping, now picking a doubtful
way very slowly, now hurrying at a stumbling run.

'I'm going back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr. Frodo,' he said.

He could no longer find any words to say; and
he turned to his own dark thoughts.

The lembas had a virtue without which they would long ago have lain
down to die.

He had stinted himself, and in his parched mouth his tongue

seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care they now had very little left, perhaps half his bottle,
and maybe there were still days to go.

All would long ago have been spent, if they had not dared to
follow the orc-road.

Yet that was now a day ago.

He saw lights like gloating yes, and dark creeping
shapes, and he heard noises as of wild beasts or the dreadful cries of tortured things; and he would
start up to find the world all dark and only empty blackness all about him.

Sam knew before he spoke, that it was vain, and that such words might do more harm than
good, but in his pity he could not keep silent. '

You can't help me in that way again.

I could not give it up,
and if you tried to take it I should go mad.'

We're going that way now, as straight as we can
make it.'

'It's no good taking anything we're not sure to need.'

'Then the sooner we're rid of it, the sooner to rest,' he
said haltingly, finding no better words to say.

Stinker picked up that orc-shirt, seemingly, and he
isn't going to add a sword to it.

And he isn't going to mess
with my pans!'

Now at last they turned their faces to the Mountain and set out, thinking no more of
concealment, bending their weariness and failing wills only to the one task of going on.

In the
dimness of its dreary day few things even in that land of vigilance could have espied them, save
from close at hand.

'But that was years ago,' he sighed, 'and far away.

The way back, if there is
one, goes past the Mountain.'

'He won't go another day
like that, if he moves at all.

And you can't go on much longer giving him all the water and most of
the food.'
'I can go on a good way though, and I will.'
'Where to?'
'To the Mountain, of course.'

When you get there, what are you going to do?

To his dismay Sam realized that he had not got an answer to this.

'Well, if Master knows how to find them, I don't.'
'There you are!' came the answer.

You are the fool,
going on hoping and toiling.

You could have lain down and gone to sleep together days ago, if you
hadn't been so dogged.

The night seemed endless and timeless, minute after minute falling
dead and adding up to no passing hour, bringing no change.

Then sleep took him, and the dim light of the last day of
their quest found them side by side.

Just tell him where to go, and he'll go.'

'How far is there to
go?'
'I don't know,' said Sam, 'because I don't know where we're going.

But already Sam was more than half way up the base, and the plain of
Gorgoroth was dim below him, wrapped in fume and shadow.

He braced himself and got up.

Faint, almost inaudibly, he heard Frodo whispering: 'Help me, Sam!

Help
me, Sam!

By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great turmoils when
Sam stood upon Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern and western slopes, and the
road on this side was not blocked.

There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone
once long ago vomited from the Mountain's furnaces.

'Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Sméagol, gollum .

He musstn't
go that way.

Give it to Sméagol, yess, give it to us!

Gollum and Frodo were locked together.

Gollum was tearing at his master, trying to get at the chain

and the Ring.

He fought back with a
sudden fury that amazed Sam, and Gollum also.

Even so things might have gone far otherwise, if
Gollum himself had remained unchanged; but whatever dreadful paths, lonely and hungry and
waterless, he had trodden, driven by a devouring desire and a terrible fear, they had left grievous
marks on him.

'Begone, and trouble me no more!

Then the vision passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on breast, his breath coming in
great gasps, and Gollum at his feet, resting on his knees with his wide-splayed hands upon the
ground.

'Go on!

Go on!

Go on!'
Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. '

Yes, I must go on,' he said.

But Gollum did not spring.

And when Precious goes we'll die, yes, die into the dust.'

He himself, though only for a little
while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed the agony of Gollum's shrivelled mind and
body, enslaved to that Ring, unable to find peace or relief ever in life again.

he said. 'Go away!

Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces, and then he turned, and as
Sam aimed a kick at him he fled away down the path.

If he had looked back, he might have seen not far below Gollum turn again, and then
with a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come, swiftly but warily, creeping on behind, a
slinking shadow among the stones.

For they were forgotten.

Sam got up.

Gollum on the edge of the abyss was fighting
like a mad thing with an unseen foe.

Suddenly Sam saw Gollum's long hands draw upwards to his mouth; his white fangs
gleamed, and then snapped as they bit.

But Gollum, dancing like a mad thing, held aloft the ring, a finger still thrust
within its circle.

Gollum cried.

Out of the depths came his last wail Precious ,

and he was gone.

The burden was gone.

His master had been saved; he was himself again, he was
free.

But he's gone now beyond recall, gone for ever.'

'But do you remember Gandalf's words: Even Gollum may have something
yet to do?

The Quest would have been in
vain, even at the bitter end.

For the Quest is achieved, and now all is over.

Aragorn stood beneath his banner, silent and stern, as one lost in thought of
things long past or far away; but his eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as the night
deepens.

Out from the beleaguered hills knights of Gondor, Riders of Rohan,
Dunedain of the North, close-serried companies, drove against their wavering foes, piercing the
press with the thrust of bitter spears.

The Ring-bearer has fulfilled his Quest.'

Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn and the other lords,
stood upon the hill-top and called; and down to him came the great eagle, Gwaihir the Windlord,
and stood before him.

You will not find me a burden much greater than when you bore me from Zirak-zigil,
where my old life burned away.'
'I would bear you,' answered Gwaihir, 'whither you will, even were you made of stone.'
'Then come, and let your brother go with us, and some other of your folk who is most swift!

And they passed
over Udun and Gorgoroth and saw all the land in ruin and tumult beneath them, and before them
Mount Doom blazing, pouring out its fire.

We are lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.'
'Well, Master, we could at least go further from this dangerous place here, from this Crack of
Doom, if that's its name.

Come, Mr. Frodo, let's go down the path at any rate!'
'Very well, Sam.

If you wish to go, I'll come,' said Frodo; and they rose and went slowly down
the winding road; and even as they passed towards the Mountain's quaking feet, a great smoke and
steam belched from the Sammath Naur, and the side of the cone was riven open, and a huge fiery
vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side.

Frodo and Sam could go no further.

And I wonder how it will go on after our part.'

When Sam awoke, he found that he was lying on some soft bed, but over him gently swayed
wide beechen boughs, and through their young leaves sunlight glimmered, green and gold.

Is everything sad going to come untrue?

But in Gondor the New Year will always now begin upon the twenty-fifth of
March when Sauron fell, and when you were brought out of the fire to the King.

When you are ready I will lead you to
him.'
'The King?' said Sam. 'What king, and who is he?'
'The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands,' said Gandalf 'and he has taken back all
his ancient realm.

But later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.'

'What have you
got there?'

They were found on Sam when you were rescued.

Strider, or I'm still asleep!'
'Yes, Sam, Strider,' said Aragorn.

And when the glad shout had swelled up and died away again, to Sam's final and complete
satisfaction and pure joy, a minstrel of Gondor stood forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing.

he said:
'Lo! lords and knights and men of valour unashamed, kings and princes, and fair people of
Gondor, and Riders of Rohan, and ye sons of Elrond, and Dunedain of the North, and Elf and
Dwarf, and greathearts of the Shire, and all free folk of the West, now listen to my lay.

And all the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment and tears the clear
voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold, and all men were hushed.

And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host
arose, and they passed to pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make merry while the day
lasted.

Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and had been laid at his side in
Cirith Ungol. '

Mr. Bilbo gave it to you, and it goes with his silver coat; he would not wish
anyone else to wear it now.'

And when they were arrayed they
went to the great feast; and they sat at the King's table with Gandalf, and King Éomer of Rohan, and
the Prince Imrahil and all the chief captains; and there also were Gimli and Legolas.

At last the glad day ended; and when the Sun was gone and the round Moon rode slowly
above the mists of Anduin and flickered through the fluttering leaves, Frodo and Sam sat under the
whispering trees amid the fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into the night with Merry
and Pippin and Gandalf, and after a while Legolas and Gimli joined them.

Orcs, and talking trees, and leagues of grass, and galloping riders, and glittering caves, and
white towers and golden halls, and battles, and tall ships sailing, all these passed before Sam's mind
until he felt bewildered.

Mortals cannot go drinking
ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a pot of beer.'

There you go about Ents again; but what they are beats me.

Nor shall I forget finding you on the hill
of the last battle.

To bed now you go.

And so shall I.'
'And I,' said Legolas, 'shall walk in the woods of this fair land, which is rest enough.

The voices of my people that have gone before me?

Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling,
Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,
In Eressea, in Elvenhome that no man can discover,
Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!'
And so singing Legolas went away down the hill.

And when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of these
beasts but that they were all destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.

But at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of the West set out
again; and they went aboard ship with all their men, and they sailed from Cair Andros down Anduin
to Osgiliath; and there they remained for one day; and the day after they came to the green fields of
the Pelennor and saw again the white towers under tall Mindolluin, the City of the Men of Gondor,
last memory of Westernesse, that had passed through the darkness and fire to a new day.

Chapter 5
The Steward and the King
Over the city of Gondor doubt and great dread had hung.

Their lord was dead and burned, dead lay the King of Rohan in their citadel, and the new
king that had come to them in the night was gone again to a war with powers too dark and terrible
for any might or valour to conquer.

When the Captains were but two days gone, the Lady Éowyn bade the women who tended her
to bring her raiment, and she would not be gainsaid, but rose; and when they had clothed her and set
her arm in a sling of linen, she went to the Warden of the Houses of Healing.
'Sir,' she said, 'I am in great unrest, and I cannot lie longer in sloth.'
'Lady,' he answered, 'you are not yet healed, and I was commanded to tend you with especial
care.

I beg you to
go back.'
'I am healed,' she said, 'healed at least in body, save my left arm only, and that is at ease.

The women can tell
me nothing.'
'There are no tidings,' said the Warden, 'save that the Lords have ridden to Morgul Vale; and
men say that the new captain out of the North is their chief.

It is not thus in
Gondor now, though once it was so, if old tales be true.

Would you have the folk of Gondor gather you herbs
only, when the Dark Lord gathers armies?

And it is not always good to be healed in body.

There is a marshal over the
Riders of Rohan; and the Lord Hurin, I am told, commands the men of Gondor.

But the Lord
Faramir is by right the Steward of the City.'
'Where can I find him?'
'In this house, lady.

But I do not
know–'
'Will you not bring me to him?

But I have not died, and battle still goes on.'

'If it lies in my power, I will do it.'
'I would have you command this Warden, and bid him let me go,' she said; but though her
words were still proud, her heart faltered, and for the first time she doubted herself.

She guessed
that this tall man, both stern and gentle, might think her merely wayward, like a child that has not
the firmness of mind to go on with a dull task to the end.

If you will stay in this house in
our care, lady, and take your rest, then you shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will; and you
shall look east, whither all our hopes have gone.

And here you will find me, walking and waiting,
and also looking east.

In the valleys of our hills there are
flowers fair and bright, and maidens fairer still; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in
Gondor so lovely, and so sorrowful.

The mantle was wrought for his mother,
Finduilas of Amroth, who died untimely, and was to him but a memory of loveliness in far days and
of his first grief; and her robe seemed to him raiment fitting for the beauty and sadness of Éowyn.

And so they stood on the walls of the City of Gondor, and a great wind rose and blew, and
their hair, raven and golden, streamed out mingling in the air.

The days that followed were golden, and Spring and Summer joined and made revel together
in the fields of Gondor.

Merry was summoned and rode away
with the wains that took store of goods to Osgiliath and thence by ship to Cair Andros; but Faramir
did not go, for now being healed he took upon him his authority and the Stewardship, although it
was only for a little while, and his duty was to prepare for one who should replace him.

And Éowyn did not go, though her brother sent word begging her to come to the field of
Cormallen.

Then Faramir came and sought her, and once more they stood on the walls together; and he
said to her: 'Éowyn, why do you tarry here, and do not go to the rejoicing in Cormallen beyond Cair
Andros, where your brother awaits you?'

'Then if you will have it so, lady,' he said, 'you do not go, because only your brother called for
you, and to look on the Lord Aragorn, Elendil's heir, in his triumph would now bring you no joy.

Or
because I do not go, and you desire still to be near me.

'You desired to have the love of the Lord Aragorn.

For you are a lady high and valiant
and have yourself won renown that shall not be forgotten; and you are a lady beautiful, I deem,
beyond even the words of the Elven-tongue to tell.

But
now, were you sorrowless, without fear or any lack, were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I
would love you.

All things will grow with joy there, if the
White Lady comes.'
'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?'

And would you have your
proud folk say of you: "There goes a lord who tamed a wild shieldmaiden of the North!

All things were now made ready in the City; and there was great concourse of people, for the
tidings had gone out into all parts of Gondor, from Min-Rimmon even to Pinnath Gelin and the far
coasts of the sea; and all that could come to the City made haste to come.

And when the sun rose in the clear
morning above the mountains in the East, upon which shadows lay no more, then all the bells rang,
and all the banners broke and flowed in the wind; and upon the White Tower of the citadel the
standard of the Stewards, bright argent like snow in the sun, bearing no charge nor device, was
raised over Gondor for the last time.

Before the barrier stood Faramir the Steward, and Hurin Warden of the Keys, and
other captains of Gondor, and the Lady Éowyn of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many
knights of the Mark; and upon either side of the Gate was a great press of fair people in raiment of
many colours and garlands of flowers.

So now there was a wide space before the walls of Minas Tirith, and it was hemmed in upon
all sides by the knights and the soldiers of Gondor and of Rohan, and by the people of the City and
of all parts of the land.

A hush fell upon all as out from the host stepped the Dunedain in silver and
grey; and before them came walking slow the Lord Aragorn.

He was clad in black mail girt with
silver, and he wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at the throat with a great jewel of green that
shone from afar; but his head was bare save for a star upon his forehead bound by a slender fillet of
silver.

Now
he is a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, mind you, but he has a golden heart, as
the saying is; and he has the healing hands.

Then forth from the Gate went Faramir with
Hurin of the Keys, and no others, save that behind them walked four men in the high helms and
armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great casket of black lebethron bound with silver.

Faramir met Aragorn in the midst of those there assembled, and he knelt, and said: 'The last
Steward of Gondor begs leave to surrender his office.'

And he held out a white rod; but Aragorn
took the rod and gave it back, saying: 'That office is not ended, and it shall be thine and thy heirs' as
long as my line shall last.

Then Faramir stood up and spoke in a clear voice: 'Men of Gondor hear now the Steward of
this Realm!

Here is Aragorn son of
Arathorn, chieftain of the Dunedain of Arnor, Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of
the North, wielder of the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the
Elfstone, Elessar of the line of Valandil, Isildur's son, Elendil's son of Númenor.

'Men of Gondor, the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that the king should receive
the crown from his father ere he died; or if that might not be, that he should go alone and take it
from the hands of his father in the tomb where he was laid.

It was shaped like the helms of the Guards of the Citadel, save that it was loftier, and it was
all white, and the wings at either side were wrought of pearl and silver in the likeness of the wings
of a sea-bird, for it was the emblem of kings who came over the Sea; and seven gems of adamant
were set in the circlet, and upon its summit was set a single jewel the light of which went up like a
flame.

Then Aragorn took the crown and held it up and said:
Et Eärello Endorenna utúlien.

Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon his head, but gave it back to
Faramir, and said: 'By the labour and valour of many I have come into my inheritance.

In token of
this I would have the Ring-bearer bring the crown to me, and let Mithrandir set it upon my head, if
he will; for he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his victory.'

Then Frodo came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore it to Gandalf; and
Aragorn knelt, and Gandalf set the White Crown upon his head, and said:
'Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while the thrones of the Valar
endure!'

But when Aragorn arose all that beheld him gazed in silence, for it seemed to them that he
was revealed to them now for the first time.

In his time the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in the days of its first
glory; and it was filled with trees and with fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril and
steel, and its streets were paved with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in it, and
the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made good, and the houses
were filled with men and women and the laughter of children, and no window was blind nor any
courtyard empty; and after the ending of the Third Age of the world into the new age it preserved
the memory and the glory of the years that were gone.

And there were brought before him many to receive his praise
and reward for their valour; and last the captain of the Guard brought to him Beregond to be judged.

And the King said to Beregond: 'Beregond, by your sword blood was spilled in the Hallows,
where that is forbidden.

Nonetheless you must leave the Guard of the Citadel, and you
must go forth from the City of Minas Tirith.'

Then the blood left Beregond's face, and he was stricken to the heart and bowed his head.

But
the King said:
'So it must be, for you are appointed to the White Company, the Guard of Faramir, Prince of
Ithilien, and you shall be its captain and dwell in Emyn Arnen in honour and peace, and in the
service of him for whom you risked all, to save him from death.'

And then Beregond, perceiving the mercy and justice of the King, was glad, and kneeling
kissed his hand, and departed in joy and content.

And Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to be his
princedom, and bade him dwell in the hills of Emyn Arnen within sight of the City.

And last of all Aragorn greeted Éomer of Rohan, and they embraced, and Aragorn said:
'Between us there can be no word of giving or taking, nor of reward; for we are brethren.

Now, as you know, we have laid Théoden the
Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the Kings of Gondor, if
you will.

Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and bring him back to rest with his own
people.'

And Éowyn said to Faramir: 'Now I must go back to my own land and look on it once again,
and help my brother in his labour; but when one whom I long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I
will return.'

The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for Aragorn was loth for
the fellowship to be dissolved.

And Frodo said to Gandalf: 'Do you know what this day is that
Aragorn speaks of?

For we are happy here, and I don't wish to go; but the days are running away,
and Bilbo is waiting; and the Shire is my home.'
'As for Bilbo,' said Gandalf, 'he is waiting for the same day, and he knows what keeps you.

And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May and high summer is not yet in; and though all
things may seem changed, as if an age of the world had gone by, yet to the trees and the grass it is
less than a year since you set out.'
'Pippin,' said Frodo, 'didn't you say that Gandalf was less close than of old?

And Aragorn himself waits for a sign.'

There came a day when Gandalf could not be found, and the Companions wondered what was
going forward.

But Gandalf took Aragorn out from the City by night, and he brought him to the
southern feet of Mount Mindolluin; and there they found a path made in ages past that few now
dared to tread.

For it led up on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had been wont
to go.

And standing there
they surveyed the lands, for the morning was come; and they saw the towers of the City far below
them like white pencils touched by the sunlight, and all the Vale of Anduin was like a garden, and
the Mountains of Shadow were veiled in a golden mist.

For though much has been saved, much must now pass
away; and the power of the Three Rings also is ended.

'
'I know it well, dear friend,' said Aragorn, 'but I would still have your counsel.'
'Not for long now,' said Gandalf. '

I shall go soon.

The burden must lie now upon you and your kindred.'
'But I shall die,' said Aragorn.

And who then shall govern Gondor and those who look to this City as to their queen, if my
desire be not granted?

Then Aragorn turned, and there was a stony slope behind him running down from the skirts of
the snow; and as he looked he was aware that alone there in the waste a growing thing stood.

Then Aragorn cried: 'Yé! utúvienyes!

Then Aragorn laid his hand gently to the sapling, and lo!

it seemed to hold only lightly to the
earth, and it was removed without hurt; and Aragorn bore it back to the Citadel.

And Aragorn planted the new tree in the court by the fountain, and swiftly and gladly it
began to grow; and when the month of June entered in it was laden with blossom.

'The sign has been given,' said Aragorn, 'and the day is not far off.'

Upon the very Eve of Midsummer, when the sky was blue as sapphire and white stars opened
in the East, but the West was still golden and the air was cool and fragrant, the riders came down the
North-way to the gates of Minas Tirith.

First rode Elrohir and Elladan with a banner of silver, and
then came Glorfindel and Erestor and all the household of Rivendell, and after them came the Lady
Galadriel and Celeborn, Lord of Lothlórien, riding upon white steeds and with them many fair folk
of their land, grey-cloaked with white gems in their hair; and last came Master Elrond, mighty
among Elves and Men, bearing the sceptre of Annuminas, and beside him upon a grey palfrey rode
Arwen his daughter, Evenstar of her people.

And Aragorn the King Elessar wedded Arwen Undómiel
in the City of the Kings upon the day of Midsummer, and the tale of their long waiting and labours
was come to fulfilment.

They welcomed Frodo and rose
to greet him; and Aragorn said:
'I know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to return to your own home.

'It is true that I wish to go back to the Shire,' said Frodo.

'But first I must go to Rivendell.

He is ancient in years now, according to his kind; and
he awaits you, for he will not again make any long journey save one.'

'In seven days we will go,' said Aragorn.

But now before you go I will confirm
the words that Faramir spoke to you, and you are made free for ever of the realm of Gondor; and all
your companions likewise.

I shall not
go with him now when he departs to the Havens; for mine is the choice of Lúthien, and as she so
have I chosen, both the sweet and the bitter.

But in my stead you shall go, Ring-bearer, when the
time comes, and if you then desire it.

'When the memory of the fear and the darkness troubles you,'
she said, 'this will bring you aid.'

For there are certain rash words concerning the Lady in the
Golden Wood that lie still between us.

'I will not say that she is the fairest lady that lives.'
'Then I must go for my axe,' said Gimli.

Then the kings of Gondor and Rohan went to the Hallows and they came to the tombs in
Rath Dínen, and they bore away King Théoden upon a golden bier, and passed through the City in
silence.

For the other Companions steeds were furnished according to their stature; and Frodo and
Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf rode upon Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the
knights of Gondor; and Legolas and Gimli as ever rode together upon Arod.

Then Aragorn let the trumpets be blown; and heralds cried:
'Behold the King Elessar is come!

The Golden Hall was arrayed with
fair hangings and it was filled with light, and there was held the highest feast that it had known
since the days of its building.

for a little while.
Farewell!'
When the burial was over and the weeping of women was stilled, and Théoden was left at last
alone in his barrow, then folk gathered to the Golden Hall for the great feast and put away sorrow;

for Théoden had lived to full years and ended in honour no less than the greatest of his sires.

And
when the time came that in the custom of the Mark they should drink to the memory of the kings,
Éowyn Lady of Rohan came forth, golden as the sun and white as snow, and she bore a filled cup to
Éomer.

Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and named all the names of the Lords of the Mark in
their order: Eorl the Young; and Brego builder of the Hall; and Aldor brother of Baldor the hapless;
and Frea, and Freawine, and Goldwine, and Deor, and Gram; and Helm who lay hid in Helm's Deep
when the Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that time the line
was broken, and after came the mounds of the east-side: Fréaláf, Helm s sister-son, and Leofa, and
Walda, and Folca, and Folcwine, and Fengel, and Thengel, and Théoden the latest.

At the last when the feast drew to an end Éomer arose and said: 'Now this is the funeral feast
of Théoden the King; but I will speak ere we go of tidings of joy, for he would not grudge that I
should do so, since he was ever a father of Éowyn my sister.

Faramir, Steward of Gondor, and
Prince of Ithilien, asks that Éowyn Lady of Rohan should be his wife, and she grants it full willing.

Thus,' said Éomer, 'is the friendship of the Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond,
and the more do I rejoice.'
'No niggard are you, Éomer,' said Aragorn, 'to give thus to Gondor the fairest thing in your
realm!'

Then Éowyn looked in the eyes of Aragorn, and she said: 'Wish me joy, my liege-lord and
healer!'

When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King Éomer.

Aragorn and his
knights, and the people of Lórien and of Rivendell, made ready to ride; but Faramir and Imrahil
remained at Edoras; and Arwen Evenstar remained also, and she said farewell to her brethren.

Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to
our welcome!'

Then
Legolas repaid his promise to Gimli and went with him to the Glittering Caves; and when they

returned he was silent, and would say only that Gimli alone could find fit words to speak of them.

'And never before has a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf in a contest of words,' said he. 'Now
therefore let us go to Fangorn and set the score right!'

But you have not been idle either away in the
south and the east, I hear; and all that I hear is good, very good.'

'You have proved mightiest, and all your labours have gone well.

Where now would you be going?

And why do you come here?'
'To see how your work goes, my friend,' said Gandalf, 'and to thank you for your aid in all that
has been achieved.

'We know it well,' said Aragorn, 'and never shall it be forgotten in Minas Tirith or in Edoras.'
'Never is too long a word even for me,' said Treebeard.

'Not while your kingdoms last, you
mean; but they will have to last long indeed to seem long to Ents.'
'The New Age begins,' said Gandalf, 'and in this age it may well prove that the kingdoms of
Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend.

Did you go into Orthanc?' asked Gandalf.
'Hoom , no, not into Orthanc!' said Treebeard.

But I added a great many things to the news that it was good
for him to think of.

That was his ruin.'
'l observe, my good Fangorn,' said Gandalf, 'that with great care you say dwelt , was , grew .

'But he is gone.

Yes, he is gone seven days.

I
let him go.

Well, he is gone, and there is no more to be said.

But the Tower of Orthanc now goes
back to the King, to whom it belongs.

Though maybe he will not need it.'
'That will be seen later,' said Aragorn.

Quickbeam bowed like a tree bending in the wind and handed to Aragorn two great black
keys of intricate shape, joined by a ring of steel.

'Now I thank you once more,' said Aragorn, 'and I
bid you farewell.

When this valley is filled there is room and
to spare west of the mountains, where once you walked long ago.'

There are no Entings.'
'Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search,' said Aragorn.

But Treebeard shook his head and said: 'It is far to go.

And maybe there
are some that would be pleased to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?'

But all save Legolas said that they must now take their leave and depart, either south or west.

'Come, Gimli!' said Legolas.

'Now by Fangorn's leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood
and see such trees as are nowhere else to be found in Middle-earth.

'Here then at last comes the ending of the Fellowship of the Ring,' said Aragorn.

long you will return to my land with the help that you promised.'
'We will come, if our own lords allow it,' said Gimli. '

Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the old Ent, and he grew gayer as he looked at
them. '

Well, my merry folk,' he said, 'will you drink another draught with me before you go?'
'Indeed we will,' they said, and he took them aside into the shade of one of the trees, and there
they saw that a great stone jar had been set.

'Well, good-bye!'

The travellers now rode with more speed, and they made their way towards the Gap of Rohan;
and Aragorn took leave of them at last close to that very place where Pippin had looked into the
Stone of Orthanc.

The Hobbits were grieved at this parting; for Aragorn had never failed them and
he had been their guide through many perils.

'Only one now remains that you could use,' answered Aragorn for you would not wish to see
what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you.

For do not forget, Peregrin Took,
that you are a knight of Gondor, and I do not release you from your service.

You are going now on
leave, but I may recall you.

Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady said to him: 'Elfstone,
through darkness you have come to your hope, and have now all your desire.

With that they parted, and it was then the time of sunset; and when after a while they turned
and looked back, they saw the King of the West sitting upon his horse with his knights about him;
and the falling Sun shone upon them and made all their harness to gleam like red gold, and the
white mantle of Aragorn was turned to a flame.

Then Aragorn took the green stone and held it up,
and there came a green fire from his hand.

As
they came out again into the open country at sundown they overtook an old man leaning on a staff,
and he was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white, and at his heels went another beggar, slouching
and whining.
'Well Saruman!' said Gandalf. 'Where are you going?'
'What is that to you?'

'Will you still order my goings, and are you not content
with my ruin?'
'You know the answers,' said Gandalf, 'no and no.

Indeed if you wish for an answer to your first question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.'

'Then once more you are going the wrong way,' said Gandalf, 'and I see no hope in your
journey.

But will you scorn our help?

Say rather that you are overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last
chance.'
'If it be truly the last, I am glad,' said Saruman, 'for I shall be spared the trouble of refusing it

again.

'Go!'

If these fine folk are going our way, then we will take
another.

'You can have what I have got left,' said Merry, 'if you will wait a moment.'

He got down and
searched in the bag at his saddle.

Well, it will serve you right when you come home, if you find
things less good in the Southfarthing than you would like.

It's time we got back.'

'But we can't go any quicker, if we are to see Bilbo.

I am going to
Rivendell first, whatever happens.'
'Yes, I think you had better do that,' said Gandalf. '

September came in with golden days and silver nights, and they rode at
ease until they reached the Swanfleet river, and found the old ford, east of the falls where it went
down suddenly into the lowlands.

Often long after the hobbits were wrapped
in sleep they would sit together under the stars, recalling the ages that were gone and all their joys
and labours in the world, or holding council, concerning the days to come.

If any wanderer had
chanced to pass, little would he have seen or heard, and it would have seemed to him only that he
saw grey figures, carved in stone, memorials of forgotten things now lost in unpeopled lands.

Quickly fading into the stones and the shadows the grey-cloaked people of
Lórien rode towards the mountains; and those who were going to Rivendell sat on the hill and
watched, until there came out of the gathering mist a flash; and then they saw no more.

Sam turned away and sighed: 'I wish I was going back to Lórien!'

First of all, before they had eaten or washed or even shed their cloaks, the hobbits went in
search of Bilbo.

The only part that seemed really to rouse him and hold his attention was the account of the
crowning and marriage of Aragorn.

Then suddenly he knew that he must
go, and say good-bye to Bilbo.

And there was still a very long way to go.

There's something of everything here, if you understand me: the Shire and the
Golden Wood and Gondor and kings' houses and inns and meadows and mountains all mixed.

And
yet, somehow, I feel we ought to be going soon.

In the evening they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. '

Well, if you must go, you must,' he said.

To Sam he gave a little bag of gold.

'I have nothing much to give to you young fellows,' he said to Merry and Pippin, 'except good
advice.'

But if you don't finish growing up soon, you are
going to find hats and clothes expensive.'

'I got rid of it, you know.'
'What a pity!' said Bilbo.

But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of other things
seem to have got mixed up with it: Aragorn's affairs, and the White Council and Gondor, and the
Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts – did you really see one, Sam? – and caves and towers
and golden trees, and goodness knows what besides.

But then the auction would have been over before I got back, and I should
have had even more trouble than I did.

The fire's very cosy here, and the food's very good, and
there are Elves when you want them.

The Road goes ever on and on
Out from the door where it began.

Now far ahead the Road has gone,
Let others follow it who can!
Let them a journey new begin,

But I at last with weary feet
Will turn towards the lighted inn,
My evening-rest and sleep to meet.'

I
wonder, Frodo my dear fellow, if you would very much mind tidying things up a bit before you go?

Get Sam to help, and when
you've knocked things into shape, come back, and I'll run over it.

For
about this time of the year, when the leaves are gold before they fall, look for Bilbo in the woods of
the Shire.

It was a year ago today.'
'Alas!

'There is no real going back.

Where shall I find rest?'
Gandalf did not answer.

'Gone,' he said.

Good evening!'
'Good evening to you!'

You
shouldn't go scaring me like that, with times as they are.

I never expected to see any of you folk again, and that's a fact: going off into the Wild with
that Strider, and all those Black Men about.

Indeed most rooms are
empty these days, as I'll not hide from you, for you'll find it out soon enough.

Ah, but there I'm forgetting, Bob's gone: goes home to his folk at nightfall now.

He led them down the passage to the parlour that they had used on that strange night more
than a year ago; and they followed him, a little disquieted, for it seemed plain to them that old
Barliman was putting a brave face on some trouble.

But if
you could spare me half an hour before you go to your beds, I would dearly like to have some talk
with you, quiet-like by ourselves.'
'That is just what we should like, too,' said Gandalf.

'That's just a
thing that we're short of, seeing how we've only got what we grow ourselves, and that's not enough.

'There was poor Mat
Heathertoes, and Rowlie Appledore, and little Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and Willie Banks
from up-away, and one of the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed.

And
Harry Goatleaf that used to be on the West-gate, and that Bill Ferny, they came in on the strangers'
side, and they've gone off with them; and it's my belief they let them in.

'And now they're gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the woods beyond Archet, and
out in the wilds north-away.

It isn't safe on the
road and nobody goes far, and folk lock up early.

They wouldn't go for armed folk, with swords and helmets and shields and all.

They themselves had become so used to
warfare and to riding in well-arrayed companies that they had quite forgotten that the bright mail
peeping from under their cloaks, and the helms of Gondor and the Mark, and the fair devices on
their shields, would seem outlandish in their own country.

You see, we're not used to such troubles; and the Rangers have all gone away, folk tell me.

'Then the Greenway will be opened again, and his messengers will come north, and there will
be comings and goings, and the evil things will be driven out of the waste-lands.

None but a robber would go there.'
'The Rangers go there,' said Gandalf. '

'And it will be good for business,
no doubt.

And drinking wine out of a
golden cup, I shouldn't wonder.

Not but what my beer's
good, Gandalf.

It's been uncommon good, since you came in the autumn of last year and put a good
word on it.

But he says your beer is always good.'
'He says?'
'Of course he does.

Haven't you got that into your head
yet?'
It went in at last, and Butterbur's face was a study in wonder.

he exclaimed when he got back his
breath.

'Him with a crown and all and a golden cup!

he called, going to the door.

'Now what does that remind me of?'
'Not another letter you've forgotten.

'Now, now, Mr. Brandybuck, don't go reminding me of that!

Sam would not go to bed until he had visited Bill in his
stable.

For a
while out of politeness the hobbits visited the Common Room in the evening and answered a good
many questions.

'I am going home now to put my notes in order.'

No trouble by day, nor any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree while the travellers
remained there; but the next morning they got up early, for as the weather was still rainy they
wished to reach the Shire before night, and it was a long ride.

The Bree folk were all out to see them
off, and were in merrier mood than they had been for a year; and those who had not seen the
strangers in all their gear before gaped with wonder at them: at Gandalf with his white beard, and
the light that seemed to gleam from him, as if his blue mantle was only a cloud over sunshine; and
at the four hobbits like riders upon errantry out of almost forgotten tales.

'Well, good luck on your road, and good luck to your home-coming! said Mr. Butterbur.

Funny
goings on, they say.

Good luck to you!

Bill the pony was with them, and as before he had a good deal of baggage, but he trotted
along beside Sam and seemed well content.

'You have forgotten Saruman.

He began to take
an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.'
'Well, we've got you with us,' said Merry, 'so things will soon be cleared up.'
'I am with you at present,' said Gandalf, 'but soon I shall not be.

My time is over: it is no longer my task to set things to rights, nor to help folk to do so.

And as for you, my dear friends, you will need no help.

I am going to have a long talk with
Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all my time.

There may be a time later for you to go and see him.

I think you will find some now.

Good-bye dear friends!

Good-bye!'

He turned Shadowfax off the Road, and the great horse leaped the green dike that here ran
beside it; and then at a cry from Gandalf he was gone, racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind
from the North.
'Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,' said Merry.

'And if hobbits of the Shire
are to be kept out in the wet on a night like this, I'll tear down your notice when I find it.'

'It won't do no good talking that way,' said one.

And when you have opened the gates you will go through them and
never return.

'Well no, the year's been good enough,' said Hob.

It's all these “gatherers” and “sharers”, I reckon, going round counting
and measuring and taking off to storage.

We've got food in our
bags.

It was a bare and ugly place,
with a mean little grate that would not allow a good fire.

All the stocks
seem to have gone.

We do hear that waggon-loads of it went away down the old road out of the
Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford way.

But it had been
going away quietly before that, in a small way.

It was a good forty miles from the
Bridge to Bag End, but someone made the journey in a hurry.

They had not made any definite plans, but had vaguely thought of going down to Crickhollow
together first, and resting there a bit.

But now, seeing what things were like, they decided to go
straight to Hobbiton.

Still there seemed an unusual amount of burning
going on, and smoke rose from many points round about.

A great cloud of it was going up far away
in the direction of the Woody End.

There they meant to stay the night; The Floating Log at
Frogmorton was a good inn.

'That'll do to go on with,' said the Shirriff-leader.

We're
going to take you to Bywater and hand you over to the Chief's Men; and when he deals with your
case you can have your say.

'I am going where I please, and in my own time.

I happen to be going to Bag
End on business, but if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.'

Now I am not going any further today, so
if you'll kindly escort me to The Floating Log , I'll be obliged.'
'I can't do that, Mr. Baggins.

'Go on and we'll follow.'

With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked wrathful but did not dare to interfere, Shirriff
Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam, who got down off his pony.

And he doesn't hold with folk moving about; so
if they will or they must, then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain their business.'
'You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with such nonsense,' said Sam.
'You used to like the inside of an inn better than the outside yourself.

You know
how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, before any of this began.

Gave me a chance of walking
round the country and seeing folk, and hearing the news, and knowing where the good beer was.

'If I hear not allowed much oftener,' said Sam, 'I'm going to get angry.'
'Can't say as I'd be sorry to see it,' said Robin lowering his voice.

'If we all got angry together
something might be done.

The west wind had shifted northward
and it was turning colder, but the rain was gone.

'Now get on!' said Merry,
and after that the travellers saw to it that their ponies' pace was quick enough to push the Shirriffs
along as fast as they could go.

'We are going on.'

'Good-bye, Cock-robin!' said Sam. 'I'll wait for you outside The Green Dragon , if you haven't
forgotten where that is.

'
'We shall break a good many things yet, and not ask you to answer,' said Pippin.

'Good luck to
you!'

They were all gone.

'I'm going right on, Mr. Frodo!'

'I'm going to see what's up.

I want to find my gaffer.'
'We ought to find out first what we're in for, Sam,' said Merry.

We had better find someone who will tell us how things are round
here.'

When they reached The Green
Dragon , the last house on the Hobbiton side, now lifeless and with broken windows, they were
disturbed to see half a dozen large ill-favoured Men lounging against the inn-wall; they were
squint-eyed and sallow-faced.

'Where d'you think you're going?' said one, the largest and most evil-looking of the crew.

'I told Sharkey it was no good trusting

those little fools.

'This country wants waking up and setting to rights,' said the ruffian, 'and Sharkey's going to
do it; and make it hard, if you drive him to it.

The Dark
Tower has fallen, and there is a King in Gondor.

He cast back his cloak,
flashed out his sword, and the silver and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he rode forward.

'Go!'

Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,' said Frodo.

'Miserable fool,
but I am sorry for him.'
'Save Lotho?

We
ought to try and rescue him.'

'Of all the ends to our journey that is the very last I should
have thought of: to have to fight half-orcs and ruffians in the Shire itself – to rescue Lotho Pimple!'
'Fight?' said Frodo.

But remember: there is to be no
slaying of hobbits, not even if they have gone over to the other side.

Really gone over, I mean; not
just obeying ruffians' orders because they are frightened.

And nobody is to be killed at all, if it can be helped.

You won't
rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.'
'No,' said Pippin.

'I've an idea,' said Sam. 'Let's go to old Tom Cotton's down South Lane!

'It's no good “getting under cover”.

No, we have got to do something at once.'
'Do what?' said Pippin.

They hate all this, you can see: all of
them except perhaps one or two rascals, and a few fools that want to be important, but don't at all
understand what is really going on.

They just want a match, though, and they'll go up in fire.

We've only got a very short time.

I am going to blow the horn of Rohan, and give them all some music
they have never heard before.'

He had not gone far when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go
up ringing into the sky.

'We'll be going back soon.'

Before he got to the lane's
end there was Farmer Cotton with three of his lads, Young Tom, Jolly, and Nick, hurrying towards
him.

We're going to clear out these ruffians, and their Chief too.

We're starting now.'
'Good, good!'

I've been itching for trouble all this
year, but folks wouldn't help.

But you can go and help him, if you have a mind,' said Farmer Cotton

with a grin.

'Good
evening, Mrs. Cotton!'

We're setting about the ruffians, and
I've got to get back to Mr. Frodo.

'Go on now!

When Sam got back he found the whole village roused.

'They moves about and comes and goes.

There's sometimes
fifty of them in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but they go out from there roving round, thieving or
“gathering” as they call it.

He's at Bag End, or was; but he don't go outside the rounds now.

No one s seen him at all, in fact,
for a week or two; but the Men don't let no one go near.'
'Hobbiton's not their only place, is it?' said Pippin.

'There's a good few down south in Longbottom and by Sarn
Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Woody End; and they've sheds at Waymeet.

We can master them, if we stick together.'
'Have they got any weapons?' asked Merry.

'But I dare say they've got other gear, if it comes to fighting.

You see our dad Mr.
Peregrin, he's never had no truck with this Lotho, not from the beginning: said that if anyone was

going to play the chief at this time of day, it would be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart.

And when Lotho sent his Men they got no change out of him.

Tooks are lucky, they've got those
deep holes in the Green Hills, the Great Smials and all, and the ruffians can't come at 'em; and they
won't let the ruffians come on their land.

'Good for the Tooks!'

'But someone is going to get in again, now.

I'll bring you back an army of Tooks in the morning.'

Now I've got a plan.'

'Very good,' said Frodo.

But two have gone off west across country.'
'To Waymeet, that'll be,' said Cotton, 'to fetch more of the gang.

'I was just going to ask you that,' he said.

'Choose a lad or two, and go and fetch him to my house.

You'll
not have need to go near the old Hobbiton village over Water.

They sat with the family in the
warm kitchen, and the Cottons asked a few polite questions about their travels, but hardly listened
to the answers: they were far more concerned with events in the Shire.

'It all began with Pimple, as we call him,' said Farmer Cotton, 'and it began as soon as you'd
gone off, Mr. Frodo.

It soon came out that he already did own a sight more than was good for
him; and he was always grabbing more, though where he got the money was a mystery: mills and
malt-houses and inns, and farms, and leaf-plantations.

Folk got angry, but he had his answer.

A lot of Men, ruffians
mostly, came with great waggons, some to carry off the goods south-away, and others to stay.

At
first goods and damage was paid for by Pimple; but soon they began lording it around and taking
what they wanted.

Old Will the Mayor set off for Bag End to
protest, but he never got there.

And after that, it would be soon after New Year, there wasn't
no more Mayor, and Pimple called himself Chief Shirriff, or just Chief, and did as he liked; and if
anyone got “uppish” as they called it, they followed Will.

There
wasn't no smoke left, save for the Men; and the Chief didn't hold with beer, save for his Men, and
closed all the inns; and everything except Rules got shorter and shorter, unless one could hide a bit
of one's own when the ruffians went round gathering stuff up “for fair distribution”: which meant
they got it and we didn't, except for the leavings which you could have at the Shirriff-houses, if you
could stomach them.

He's got other mills like it.

But you've got to have grist before you can grind;
and there was no more for the new mill to do than for the old.

If they want to make the Shire into a desert,
they're going the right way about it.

Some of the ruffians were going up with a big cart.
'

“Where be you a-going?” says she.
' “To Bag End,” says they.
' “What for?” says she.
'

“So get out o' the road, old hagling!”
' “I'll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving ruffians!” says she, and ups with her umbrella and
goes for the leader.

'Good evening.

'The Thain has
raised all our country,' he said, 'and the news is going like fire all ways.

The Thain has gone after them, to
hold off the big gang down that way; but he's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the other folk he can
spare.'

The next news was less good.

'They're coming along the road from
Waymeet, but a good many stray ruffians have joined up with them.

There's got to be some fighting
before this is settled, Mr. Frodo.'

Behind them other hobbits now pushed out some more waggons
that had been hidden in a field, and so blocked the way back.

Then go back twenty paces and
sit down.

A score or more broke back and charged the waggons.

But many of the
strongest and most desperate got out on the west side, and attacked their enemies fiercely, being
now more bent on killing than escaping.

The dead ruffians were
laden on waggons and hauled off to an old sand-pit nearby and there buried: in the Battle Pit, as it
was afterwards called.

He's responsible for
bringing in these ruffians, and for all the evil they have done.'

All the chestnuts were gone.

Great waggons were standing in disorder in a field beaten bare of grass.

I thought you'd gone off in one o' them ships you used to prattle about, sailing,
sailing.

We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious Boss.

Dashing back into the mill he ran out with a horn and blew it loudly.
'Save your breath!'

They had searched every room and found
no living thing save rats and mice.

'Shall we turn on the others to search the sheds?'
'This is worse than Mordor!' said Sam. 'Much worse in a way.

But you
must go dangling after him, dawdling and talking, and riding round twice as far as you needed.

Still I have already done much that you will find it hard to mend or undo in
your lives.

'Well, if that is what you find pleasure in,' said Frodo, 'I pity you.

Go at once and never return!'

When they heard Frodo's command, they murmured
angrily:
'Don't let him go!

'But do not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power!

He has lost all power, save his
voice that can still daunt you and deceive you, if you let it.

Go, Saruman, by the speediest way!'
'Worm!

Saruman turned to go, and Wormtongue shuffled after him.

He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us; but I would still spare him, in
the hope that he may find it.'

You have robbed my revenge of sweetness, and now I must go hence
1

Well, I go and I will trouble you no more.

You can have rest and food here for a while, until you are stronger and can go your own ways.'

A nasty end, and I wish I needn't have seen it; but it's a
good riddance.'
'And the very last end of the War, I hope,' said Merry.

Poor thing, she looked very old and thin when they rescued her from
a dark and narrow cell.

When the poor creature died next Spring-she was after all more than a hundred years old –
Frodo was surprised and much moved: she had left all that remained of her money and of Lotho's
for him to use in helping hobbits made homeless by the troubles.

Great stores of goods and food, and beer,
were found that had been hidden away by the ruffians in sheds and barns and deserted holes, and
especially in the tunnels at Michel Delving and in the old quarries at Scary; so that there was a great
deal better cheer that Yule than anyone had hoped for.

The Gaffer was restored to Number Three;
and he said often and did not care who heard it:
'It's an ill wind as blows nobody no good, as I always say.

'But I'm sure the Lady would not like me to keep it all for my own garden, now so many folk
have suffered,' said Sam.
'Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,' said Frodo, 'and then use the gift
to help your work and better it.

All through the winter he remained as patient as he could, and
tried to restrain himself from going round constantly to see if anything was happening.

In the Party Field a beautiful young sapling
leaped up: it had silver bark and long leaves and burst into golden flowers in April.

All the children born or begotten in that year, and there were many, were
fair to see and strong, and most of them had a rich golden hair that had before been rare among
hobbits.

Indeed a
generation later one might hear an old gaffer in an inn, after a good pint of well-earned ale, put
down his mug with a sigh: 'Ah! that was proper fourteen-twenty, that was!'

'It is gone for ever,' he said, 'and now all is dark and empty.'

But the fit passed, and when Sam got back on the twenty-fifth, Frodo had recovered, and he
said nothing about himself.

In the meanwhile Bag End had been set in order, and Merry and Pippin
came over from Crickhollow bringing back all the old furniture and gear, so that the old hole soon
looked very much as it always had done.

When all was at last ready Frodo said: 'When are you going to move in and join me, Sam?'
Sam looked a bit awkward.

It seems she didn't like my going abroad at all, poor lass;
but as I hadn't spoken, she couldn't say so.

When the labours of repair had all been planned and set going he took
to a quiet life, writing a great deal and going through all his notes.

Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow, and there was much coming
and going between Buckland and Bag End.

'Lordly' folk called
them, meaning nothing but good; for it warmed all hearts to see them go riding by with their
mail-shirts so bright and their shields so splendid, laughing and singing songs of far away; and if
they were now large and magnificent, they were unchanged otherwise, unless they were indeed
more fairspoken and more jovial and full of merriment than ever before.

But then he got up, and the turn seemed to pass, and he was quite himself the next day.

But if it's to be a
flower-name, then I don't trouble about the length: it must be a beautiful flower, because, you see, I
think she is very beautiful, and is going to be beautifuller still.'

Well, Sam, what about elanor , the sun-star, you remember the
little golden flower in the grass of Lothlórien?'
'You're right again, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam delighted.

'I want you to see Rose and find out if she can spare you, so that you
and I can go off together.

You can't go far or for a long time now, of course,' he said a little
wistfully.

Tell Rose that you won't be away
very long, not more than a fortnight; and you'll come back quite safe.'
'I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and see Mr. Bilbo,' said Sam.
'And yet the only place I really want to be in is here.

It was a fair
golden morning, and Sam did not ask where they were going: he thought he could guess.

Elrond wore a mantle of grey and had a star upon his forehead, and a silver harp was in
his hand, and upon his finger was a ring of gold with a great blue stone, Vilya, mightiest of the
Three.

He had forgotten how
beautiful the Lady was.

And now I think I am quite ready to go on another journey.

'The Ring-bearers should go together.'
'Where are you going, Master?' cried Sam, though at last he understood what was happening.

You have so much to enjoy and to be, and
to do.'
'But,' said Sam, and tears started in his eyes, 'I thought you were going to enjoy the Shire, too.

I tried to save the Shire, and it
has been saved, but not for me.

And also you have Rose, and Elanor; and Frodo-lad will come, and
Rosie-lass, and Merry, and Goldilocks, and Pippin; and perhaps more that I cannot see.

You will be the Mayor, of course, as long as you want to
be, and the most famous gardener in history; and you will read things out of the Red Book, and
keep alive the memory of the age that is gone.

And that will keep you as busy and as happy as anyone can
be, as long as your part of the Story goes on.

Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all the night, none saw
them pass, save the wild creatures; or here and there some wanderer in the dark who saw a swift
shimmer under the trees, or a light and shadow flowing through the grass as the Moon went
westward.

And when they had passed from the Shire, going about the south skirts of the White
Downs, they came to the Far Downs, and to the Towers, and looked on the distant Sea; and so they

rode down at last to Mithlond, to the Grey Havens in the long firth of Lune.

Very tall he was,
and his beard was long, and he was grey and old, save that his eyes were keen as stars; and he
looked at them and bowed, and said: 'All is now ready.'

Then those who were to go were glad, for they knew
that Gandalf also would take ship with them.

But even as they stood there, and the Elves
were going aboard, and all was being made ready to depart, up rode Merry and Pippin in great
haste.

Go in
peace!

The section A III, Durin's Folk , was
probably derived from Gimli the Dwarf, who maintained his friendship with Peregrin and Meriadoc
and met them again many times in Gondor and Rohan.

Others are editorial.1
The dates given are those of the Third Age, unless they are marked S.A. (Second Age) or F.A.
(Fourth Age).2 The Third Age was held to have ended when the Three Rings passed away in
September 3021, but for the purposes of records in Gondor F.A.1 began on March 25, 3021.

On the
equation of the dating of Gondor and Shire Reckoning see Vols.

The Jewels were coveted by
Morgoth the Enemy, who stole them and, after destroying the Trees, took them to Middle-earth, and
guarded them in his great fortress of Thangorodrim.

Against the will of the Valar Feanor forsook
the Blessed Realm and went in exile to Middle-earth, leading with him a great part of his people;
for in his pride he purposed to recover the Jewels from Morgoth by force.

Thereafter followed the
hopeless war of the Eldar and the Edain against Thangorodrim, in which they were at last utterly
defeated.

There were three unions of the Eldar and the Edain: Lúthien and Beren; Idril and Tuor; Arwen
and Aragorn.

I, 54; II, 54; III, 54: no likeness remained in Middle-earth of Laurelin the Golden.

Lúthien Tinúviel was the daughter of King Thingol Grey-cloak of Doriath in the First Age,
but her mother was Melian of the people of the Valar.

Together they wrested a silmaril from the Iron Crown of Morgoth.

Idril Celebrindal was the daughter of Turgon, king of the hidden city of Gondolin.

Tuor was
the son of Huor of the House of Hador, the Third House of the Edain and the most renowned in the
wars with Morgoth.

Eärendil wedded Elwing, and with the power of the silmaril passed the Shadows3 and came
to the Uttermost West, and speaking as ambassador of both Elves and Men obtained the help by
which Morgoth was overthrown.

The silmarilli alone preserved the
ancient light of the Two Trees of Valinor before Morgoth poisoned them; but the other two were lost
at the end of the Firth Age.

As a reward for their sufferings in the cause against Morgoth, the Valar, the Guardians of the
World, granted to the Edain a land to dwell in, removed from the dangers of Middle-earth.

His daughter should have
been the fourth Queen, Tar-Míriel, but the King's nephew usurped the sceptre and became
Ar-Pharazôn the Golden, last King of the Númenoreans.

Ar-Pharazôn the Golden
was the proudest and most powerful of all the Kings, and no less than the kingship of the world was
his desire.

He prepared then the greatest armament that the world bad seen, and
when all was ready he sounded his trumpets and set sail; and he broke the Ban of the Valar, going
up with war to wrest everlasting life from the Lords of the West But when Ar-Pharazôn set foot
upon the shores of Aman the Blessed, the Valar laid down their Guardianship and called upon the
One, and the world was changed.

There they established in the North-west the Númenorean realms in exile, Arnor and
Gondor.2 Elendil was the High King and dwelt in the North at Annuminas; and the rule in the South
was committed to his sons, Isildur and Anárion.

For this good at least they believed lad come
out of ruin, that Sauron also had perished.

Orodruin
burst once more into flame, and was named anew in Gondor Amon Amarth , Mount Doom.

Aragorn I † 2327, Araglas 2455, Arahad I 2523, Aragost 2588, Aravorn 2654, Arahad II 2719,
Arassuil 2784, Arathorn I † 2848, Argonui 2912, Arador † 2930, Arathorn II † 2933, Aragorn II
F.A.120.

Gondor now
reached the height of its power.

In his time the first disaster of Gondor began, the
Kin-strife.

Stewards of Gondor .

He ruled for a year after the fall of
Ondoher, and advised Gondor to reject Arvedui's claim to the crown.

Mardil 2080, Eradan 2116, Herion 2148, Belegorn 2204, Hurin I 2244,
Turin I 2278, Hador 2395, Barahir 2412, Dior 2435, Denethor I 2477, Boromir 2489, Cirion 2567.

Hallas 2605, Hurin II 2628, Belecthor I 2655, Orodreth 2685, Ecthelion I 2698, Egalmoth
2743, Beren 2763, Beregond 2811, Belecthor II 2872, Thorondir 2882, Turin II 2914, Turgon 2953,
Ecthelion II 2984, Denethor II.

[The
lord of that land was known as the Witch-king, but it was not known until later that he was indeed
the chief of the Ringwraiths, who came north with the purpose of destroying the Dunedain in Arnor,
seeing hope in their disunion, while Gondor was strong.]

Arveleg son of Argeleb, with the help of Cardolan and Lindon, drove back his enemies from
the Hills; and for many years Arthedain and Cardolan held in force a frontier along the Weather
Hills, the Great Road, and the lower Hoarwell.

The Tower of Amon
Sul was burned and razed; but the palantír was saved and carried back in retreat to Fornost,
Rhudaur was occupied by evil Men subject to Angmar,2 and the Dunedain that remained there were
slain or fled west Cardolan was ravaged.

A
remnant of the faithful among the Dunedain of Cardolan also held out in Tyrn Gorthad (the
Barrowdowns), or took refuge in the Forest behind.

It is said that Angmar was for a time subdued by the Elvenfolk coming from Lindon; and from
Rivendell, for Elrond brought help over the Mountains out of Lórien.

It is said that the mounds of Tyrn Gorthad, as the Barrowdowns were called of old, are very
ancient, and that many were built in the days of the old world of the First Age by the forefathers of
the Edain, before they crossed the Blue Mountains into Beleriand, of which Lindon is all that now
1 I, 54.

'For a while Arvedui hid in the tunnels of the old dwarf-mines near the far end of the
Mountains, but he was driven at last by hunger to seek the help of the Lossoth, the Snowmen of
Forochel.1 Some of these he found in camp by the seashore; but they did not help the king willingly,
for he had nothing to offer them, save a few jewels which they did cat value; and they were afraid of
the Witch-king, who (they said) could make frost or thaw at his will But partly out of pity for the
gaunt king and his men, and partly out of fear of their weapons, they gave them a little food and
built for them snow-huts.

There Arvedui was forced to wait, hoping for help from the south; for his
horses had perished.

If they have them, let the
seamen bring us food and other things that we need, and you may stay here till the Witch-king goes
home.

It has no power,
save the esteem in which those hold it who love my house.

It will not help you, but if ever you are
in need, my kin will ransom it with great store of all that you desire.

"2
'Yet the counsel of the Lossoth was good, by chance or by foresight; for the ship had not
reached the open sea when a great storm of wind arose, and came with blinding snow out of the
North; and it drove the ship back upon the ice and piled ice up against it.

Even the mariners of
Cirdan were helpless, and in the night the ice crushed the hull, and the ship foundered.

To
the help of the king they sent some archers who never returned; and others went also to the battle in
1 These are a strange, unfriendly people, remnant of the Forodwaith, Men of far-off days, accustomed to the bitter
colds of the realm of Morgoth.

2 'In this way the ring of the House of Isildur was saved; for it was afterwards ransomed by the Dunedain.

It is said
that it was none other than the ring which Felagund of Nargothrond gave to Barahir, and Beren recovered at great peril'.

But at last that hope was forgotten, and remained only in the saying When the King comes
back , used of some good that could not be achieved, or of some evil that could not be amended.

Aragorn I, it is said, was slain by wolves, which ever after remained a peril in
Eriador, and are not yet ended.

She was pursued and rescued by Elladan and Elrohir, but not before
she had suffered torment and had received a poisoned wound.

It
was at this time that a large band came so far west as to enter the Shire, and were driven off by
Bandobras Took.'3
There were fourteen Chieftains, before the fifteenth and last was born, Aragorn II, who
became again King of born Gondor and Arnor. '

Also, though the length of the lives of the Dunedain grew ever less in Middle-earth, after the ending
of their kings the waning was swifter in Gondor; and many of the Chieftains of the North still lived
to twice the age of Men, and far beyond the days of even the oldest amongst us.

Aragorn indeed
1

Bilbo no doubt referred to Gondor; he seems to have become
well acquainted with matters concerning Aragorn's line.

It was already more than five thousand years old when Elrond surrendered it
to Aragorn (III, 54).

The crown of Gondor was derived from the form of a Númenorean war-helm.

In the beginning it
was indeed a plain helm; and it is said to have been the one that Isildur wore in the Battle of Dagorlad (for the helm of
Anárion was crushed by the stone-cast from Barad-dur that slew him).

But in the days of Atanatar Alcarin this was
replaced by the jewelled helm that was used in the crowning of Aragorn.'
2 I, 54
3 I, 10; III,54.

lived to be two hundred and ten years old, longer than any of his line since King Arvegil; but in
Aragorn Elessar the dignity of the kings of old was renewed.

(iv) Gondor and the heirs of Anárion

There were thirty-one kings in Gondor after Anárion win was slain before the Barad-dur.

In his time Gondor was first attacked by wild men out of the East.

With Tarannon, the twelfth king, began the line of the Ship-kings, who built navies and
extended the sway of Gondor along the coasts west and south of the Mouths of Anduin.

He laid siege by sea and land to Umbar, and took it, and it became a great harbour and
fortress of the power of Gondor.1 But Eärnil did not long survive his triumph.

For many years Umbar was invested, but could not be taken because of the sea-power of
Gondor.

Ciryaher son of Ciryandil bided his time, and at last when he had gathered strength he
came down from the north by sea and by land, and crossing the River Harnen his armies utterly
defeated the Men of the Harad, and their kings were compelled to acknowledge the overlordship of
Gondor (1050).

In his day Gondor reached the summit of its power.

The Men of the Vales of Anduin acknowledged its authority; and the kings of the Harad did homage
to Gondor, and their sons lived as hostages in the court of its King.

Atanatar Alcarin son of Hyarmendacil lived in great
splendour, so that men said precious stones are pebbles in Gondor for children to play with.

The waning of Gondor had already begun before he died, and was doubtless
observed by its enemies.

Nonetheless it was not until the
days of Valacar that the first great evil came upon Gondor: the civil war of the Kin-strife, in which
great loss and ruin was caused and never fully repaired.

Minalcar, son of Calmacil, was a man of great vigour, and in 1240 Narmacil, to rid himself of
all cares, made him Regent of the realm.

From that time onwards he governed Gondor in the name
1 'The great cape and land-locked firth of Umbar had been Númenorean land since days of old; but it was a
stronghold of the King's Men, who were afterwards called the Black Númenoreans, corrupted by Sauron, and who hated
above all the followers of Elendil.

After the fall of Sauron their race swiftly dwindled or became merged with the Men
of Middle-earth, but they inherited without lessening their hatred of Gondor.

These had increased greatly in the peace brought by the power of Gondor.

In the days of Narmacil I their attacks began again, though at first with little force; but it was
learned by the regent that the Northmen did not always remain true to Gondor, and some would join
forces with the Easterlings, either out of greed for spoil, or in the furtherance of feuds among their
princes.

He it was that
built the pillars of the Argonath at the entrance to Nen Hithoel.

But since he needed men, and
desired to strengthen the bond between Gondor and the Northmen, he took many of them into his
service and gave to some high rank in his armies.

'For the high men of Gondor already looked askance at the Northmen among them; and it was
a thing unheard of before that the heir to the crown, or any son of the King, should wed one of
lesser and alien race.

Therefore when Eldacar succeeded his father there was war in Gondor.

To the lineage of Gondor he added the fearless spirit of the
Northmen.

Many
gathered to him there, both of the Northmen in the service of Gondor, and of the Dunedain of the
northern parts of the realm.

There was a
great battle in Lebennin at the Crossings of Erui, in which much of the best blood in Gondor was
shed.

Umbar remained at war with
Gondor for many lives of men, a threat to its coastlands and to all traffic on the sea.

It was never
again completely subdued until the days of Elessar; and the region of South Gondor became a
debatable land between the Corsairs and the Kings.'

'The loss of Umbar was grievous to Gondor, not only because the realm was diminished in the
south and its hold upon the Men of the Harad was loosened, but because it was there that
Ar-Pharazôn the Golden, last King of Númenor, had landed and humbled the might of Sauron.

It was crowned with a globe of
crystal that took the rays of the Sun and of the Moon and shone like a bright star that could be seen
in clear weather even on the coasts of Gondor or far out upon the western sea.

For many of the great had been slain in the
Kin-strife; while Eldacar showed favour to the Northmen, by whose help he had regained the
crown, and the people of Gondor were replenished by great numbers that came from Rhovanion.

The second and greatest evil came upon Gondor in the reign of Telemnar, the twenty-sixth
king, whose father Minardil, son of Eldacar, was slain at Pelargir by the Corsairs of Umbar.

Soon after a deadly
plague came with dark winds out of the East The King and all his children died, and great numbers
of the people of Gondor, especially those that lived in Osgiliath.

It is true that the enemies of
Gondor also suffered, or they might have overwhelmed it in its weakness; but Sauron could wait,
and it may well be that the opening of Mordor was what he chiefly desired.

Tarondor, coming young to the throne, had the longest reign of all the Kings of Gondor; but
he could achieve little more than the reordering of his realm within, and the slow nursing of its
strength.

But in
the new evils that soon befell Gondor Umbar was again lost, and fell into the hands of the Men of
the Harad.

The third evil was the invasion of the Wainriders, which sapped the waning strength of
Gondor in wars that lasted for almost a hundred years.

Stirred up, as was afterwards seen, by the emissaries of Sauron, they made a sudden
assault upon Gondor, and King Narmacil II was slain in battle with them beyond Anduin in 1856.

The people of eastern and southern Rhovanion were enslaved; and the frontiers of Gondor were for
that time withdrawn to the Anduin and the Emyn Muil.

Calimehtar, son of Narmacil II, helped by a revolt in Rhovanion, avenged his father with a
great victory over the Easterlings upon Dagorlad in 1899, and for a while the peril was averted.

But neither kingdom was able to send help to the other; for Angmar renewed its
attack upon Arthedain at the same time as the Wainriders reappeared in great force.

Many of the Wainriders now passed south of Mordor and made alliance with men of Khand
and of Near Harad; and in this great assault from north and south, Gondor came near to destruction.

Hastening
north, he gathered to him all that he could of the retreating Northern Army and came up against the
main camp of the Wainriders, while they were feasting and revelling, believing that Gondor was
overthrown and that nothing remained but to take the spoil.

'On the death of Ondoher and his sons, Arvedui of the North-kingdom claimed the crown of
Gondor, as the direct descendant of Isildur, and as the husband of Firiel, only surviving child of
Ondoher.

'The Council of Gondor answered: "The crown and royalty of Gondor belongs solely to the
heirs of Meneldil, son of Anárion, to whom Isildur relinquished this realm.

In Gondor this heritage
is reckoned through the sons only; and we have not heard that the law is otherwise in Arnor."
'To this Arvedui replied: "Elendil had two sons, of whom Isildur was the elder and the heir of
his father.

We have heard that the name of Elendil stands to this day at the head of the line of the
Kings of Gondor, since he was accounted the high king of all the lands of the Dunedain.

He did not relinquish his royalty in Gondor, nor intend that the
realm of Elendil should be divided for ever.

To this Gondor made no answer.

The crown was claimed by Eärnil, the victorious captain; and
it was granted to him with the approval of all the Dunedain in Gondor, since he was of the royal
house.

Arvedui did not press his claim; for he had neither the power nor the will to oppose the choice of
the Dunedain of Gondor; yet the claim was never forgotten by his descendants even when their
kingship had passed away.

"
'In Gondor also one king only followed Eärnil.

But Eärnil was a
wise man, and not arrogant, even if, as to most men in Gondor, the realm in Arthedain seemed a
small thing, for all the lineage of its lords.

'He sent messages to Arvedui announcing that he received the crown of Gondor, according to
the laws and the needs of the South-kingdom, "but I do not forget the loyalty of Arnor, nor deny our
kinship, nor wish that the realms of Elendil should be estranged.

King
Araphant continued with dwindling strength to hold off the assaults of Angmar, and Arvedui when
he succeeded did likewise; but at last in the autumn of 1973 messages came to Gondor that
Arthedain was in great straits, and that the Witch-king was preparing a last stroke against it.

and so many were his ships that they could scarcely find harbourage,
though both the Harlond and the Forlond also were filled; and from them descended an army of
power, with munition and provision for a war of great kings.

Or so it seemed to the people of the
North, though this was but a small sending-force of the whole might of Gondor.

Before he could gain the shelter of Carn Dum the cavalry of Gondor overtook him with Earnur
riding at their head.

At the same time a force under Glorfindel the Elf-lord came up out of
Rivendell.

It
was, however, from Silmarien that Elendil was descended'.

Captain of Gondor for the fullness of his hatred, and with a terrible cry he rode straight upon him.

'Then the Witch-king laughed, and none that heard it ever forgot the horror of that cry.

But
Glorfindel rode up then on his white horse, and in the midst of his laughter the Witch-king turned to
flight and passed into the shadows.

For night came down on the battlefield, and he was lost, and
none saw whither he went.
'Earnur now rode back, but Glorfindel, looking into the gathering dark, said: "Do not pursue
him!

These words many remembered; but Earnur was angry, desiring only to be avenged for his
disgrace.
'So ended the evil realm of Angmar; and so did Earnur, Captain of Gondor, earn the chief
hatred of the Witch-king; but many years were still to pass before that was revealed.'

But it was not until 2000 that they issued from Mordor by the Pass of Cirith Ungol and laid
siege to Minas Ithil

They were not
expelled while the Third Ago lasted; and Minas Ithil became a place of fear, and was renamed
Minas Morgul.

His prowess was such that none in Gondor could stand against him in those weapon-sports in
which he delighted, seeming rather a champion than a captain or king, and retaining his vigour and
skill to a later age than was then usual.'

It was believed in Gondor that the faithless
enemy had trapped the king, and that he had died in torment in Minas Morgul; but since there were
no witnesses of his death, Mardil the Good Steward ruled Gondor in his name for many years.

So it was that
no claimant to the crown could be found who was of pure blood, or whose claim all would allow;
and all feared the memory of the Kin-strife, knowing that if any such dissension arose again, then
Gondor would perish.

Therefore, though the years lengthened, the Steward continued to rule
Gondor, and the crown of Elendil lay in the lap of King Eärnil in the Houses of the Dead, where
Earnur had left it.

Yet many in Gondor still believed that a king would indeed

return in some time to come; and some remembered the ancient line of the North, which it was
rumoured still lived on in the shadows.

After Mardil Voronwe, who was reckoned the first of the line there followed twenty-four
Ruling Stewards of Gondor, until the time of Denethor II, the twenty-sixth and last.

But from the
time of Denethor I, there was never full peace again, and even when Gondor had no great or open
war its borders were under constant threat.

He was watchful and wary, but the reach of Gondor
had grown short, and he could do little more than defend his borders, while his enemies (or the
power that moved them) prepared strokes against him that he could not hinder.

Then out of the North there came help beyond hope, and the horns
of the Rohirrim were first heard in Gondor.

Cirion granted to Eorl
that land to dwell in, and he swore to Cirion the Oath of Eorl, of friendship at need or at call to the
Lords of Gondor.'

In the days of Beren, the nineteenth Steward, an even greater peril came upon Gondor.

Three
great fleets, long prepared, came up from Umbar and the Harad, and assailed the coasts of Gondor
in great force; and the enemy made many landings, even as far north as the mouth of the Isen.

But in Gondor south of the mountains things were less evil, and before spring came
Beregond son of Beren bad overcome the invaders.

He was the
greatest captain that had arisen in Gondor since Boromir; and when he succeeded his father (2763)

Gondor began to recover its strength.

It was in the days of Beregond that the War of the Dwarves and Orcs was fought in the Misty

Mountains (2793 9), of which only rumour came south, until the Orcs fleeing from Nanduhirion
attempted to cross Rohan and establish themselves in the White Mountains.

In the days of Turin II the enemies of Gondor began to move again; for Sauron was grown
again to power and the day of his arising was drawing near.

But his
chief peril lay in the south, where the Haradrim had occupied South Gondor, and there was much
fighting along the Poros.

King Folcwine of Rohan
fulfilled the Oath of Eorl and repaid his debt for the aid brought by Beregond, sending many men to
Gondor.

Long it stood, Haudh in Gwanur , high upon the shore of
the river, and the enemies of Gondor feared to pass it.

Turgon followed Turin, but of his time it is chiefly remembered that two years ere his death,
Sauron arose again, and declared himself openly; and he re-entered Mordor long prepared for him.

When Turgon died Saruman took Isengard for his own, and fortified it.

'Ecthelion II, son of Turgon, was a man of wisdom.

Thorongil men called
him in Gondor, the Eagle of the Star, for he was swift and keen-eyed, and wore a silver star upon his
cloak; but no one knew his true name nor in what land he was born.

'Thorongil often counselled Ecthelion that the strength of the rebels in Umbar was a great
peril to Gondor, and a threat to the fiefs of the south that would prove deadly, if Sauron moved to
open war.

At last he got leave of the Steward and gathered a small fleet, and he came to Umbar
unlooked-for by night, and there burned a great part of the ships of the Corsairs.

'He sent a message of farewell to Ecthelion, saying: "Other tasks now call me, lord, and much
time and many perils must pass, ere I come again to Gondor, if that be my fate."

He
had married late (2976), taking as wife Finduilas, daughter of Adrahil of Dot Amroth.

Rather he
was a man after the sort of King Earnur of old, taking no wife and delighting chiefly in arms;
fearless and strong, but caring little for lore, save the tales of old battles.

He welcomed
Gandalf at such times as he came to the City, and he learned what he could from his wisdom; and in
this as in many other matters he displeased his father.
'Yet between the brothers there was great love, and had been since childhood, when Boromir
was the helper and protector of Faramir.

It did not seem possible to Faramir that any one in
Gondor could rival Boromir, heir of Denethor, Captain of the White Tower; and of like mind was
Boromir.

And after the War the days of the Ruling Stewards came to an end; for the
heir of Isildur and Anárion returned and the kingship was renewed, and the standard of the White
Tree flew once more from the Tower of Ecthelion.'
(v) here follows a part of the tale of Aragorn and Arwen
'Arador was the grandfather of the King.

The next year Gilraen bore him a son, and he was called Aragorn.

But Aragorn
was only two years old when Arathorn went riding against the Orcs with the sons of Elrond, and he
was slain by an orc-arrow that pierced his eye; and so he proved indeed shortlived for one of his
race, being but sixty years old when befell.

Then Aragorn, being now the Heir of Isildur, was taken with his mother to dwell in the house
of Elrond; and Elrond took the place of his father and came to love him as a son of his own.

The Sceptre of Annuminas I withhold, for you have yet to earn it."
'The next day at the hour of sunset Aragorn walked alone in we woods, and his heart was high
within him; and he sang, for he was full of hope and the world was fair.

And suddenly even as he
sang he saw a maiden walking on a greensward among the white stems of the birches; and he halted
amazed, thinking that he had strayed into a dream, or else that he had received the gift of the
Elf-minstrels, who can make the things of which they sing appear before the eyes of those that
listen.
'For Aragorn had been singing a part of the Lay of Lúthien which tells of the meeting of
Lúthien and Beren in the forest of Neldoreth.

'For a moment Aragorn gazed in silence, but fearing that she would pass away and never be
seen again, he called to her crying, Tinúviel, Tinúviel!

even as Beren had done in the Elder Days
long ago.

But who are you?"
'"Estel I was called," he said; "but I am Aragorn, Arathorn's son, Isildur's Heir, Lord of the
Dunedain"; yet even in the saying he felt that this high lineage, in which his heart had rejoiced, was
now of little worth, and as nothing compared to her dignity and loveliness.

"
'"Often is it seen," said Aragorn, "that in dangerous days men hide their chief treasure.

"
'Then Aragorn wondered, for she had seemed of no greater age than he, who had lived yet no
more than a score of years in Middle-earth.

"
'Then Aragorn was abashed, for he saw the elven-light in her eyes and the wisdom of many
days; yet from that hour he loved Arwen Undómiel daughter of Elrond.

'In the days that followed Aragorn fell silent, and his mother perceived that some strange thing
bad befallen him; and at last he yielded to her questions and told her of the meeting in the twilight
of the trees.
'"My son," said Gilraen, "your aim is high, even for the descendant of many kings.

"Yet we have some part in that kinship," said Aragorn, "if the tale of my forefathers is true
that I have learned.

"
'"It is true," said Gilraen, "but that was long ago and in another age of this world, before our
race was diminished.

Therefore I am afraid; for without the good will of Master Elrond the Heirs of
Isildur will soon come to an end.

But I do not think that you will have the good will of Elrond in
this matter.

"
'"Then bitter will my days be, and I will walk in the wild alone," said Aragorn.

One day, therefore, before the fall of the
year he called Aragorn to his chamber, and he said: "Aragorn, Arathorn's son, Lord of the Dunedain,
listen to me!

You shall neither have wife, nor bind any woman to you in troth, until your time comes and
you are found worthy of it."
'Then Aragorn was troubled, and he said: "Can it be that my mother has spoken of this?"
'"No indeed," said Elrond.

"
'"What is that doom?" said Aragorn.

'"That so long as I abide here, she shall live with the youth of the Eldar," answered Elrond,
"and when I depart, she shall go with the, if she so chooses.

"
'"I see," said Aragorn, "that I have turned my eyes to a treasure no less dear than the treasure
of Thingol that Beren once desired.

But
there will be no choice before Arwen, my beloved, unless you, Aragorn, Arathorn's son, come
between us and bring one of us, you or me, to a bitter parting beyond the end of the world.

He sighed, and after a while, looking gravely upon the young
man, he said again: "The years will bring what they will.

The days darken, and much evil is to come."
'Then Aragorn took leave lovingly of Elrond; and the next day he said farewell to his mother,
and to the house of Elrond, and to Arwen, and he went out into the wild.

He
rode in the host of the Rohirrim, and fought for the Lord of Gondor by land and by sea; and then in
the hour of victory he passed out of the knowledge of Men of the West, and went alone far into the
East and deep into the South, exploring the hearts of Men, both evil and good, and uncovering the
plots and devices of the servants of Sauron.

'It came to pass that when Aragorn was nine and forty years of age he returned from perils on
the dark confines of Mordor, where Sauron now dwelt again and was busy with evil.

He was weary
and he wished to go back to Rivendell and rest there for a while

But Aragorn was grown to full stature of body
and mind, and Galadriel bade him cast aside his wayworn raiment, and she clothed him in silver and
white, with a cloak of elven-grey and a bright gem on his brow.

And thus it was that Arwen first
beheld him again after their long parting; and as he came walking towards her under the trees of
Caras Galadhon laden with flowers of gold, her choice was made and her doom appointed.

And on the evening of Midsummer Aragorn, Arathorn's son, and Arwen daughter of
Elrond went to the fair hill, Cerin Amroth, in the midst of the land, and they walked unshod on the
undying grass with elanor and niphredil about their feet

"
' But Aragorn answered: "Alas!

But when Aragorn came again to
Rivendell he called him to him, and he said:
'"My son, years come when hope will fade, and beyond them little is clear to the.

She shall not be the bride of any Man less than the King of both Gondor and
Arnor.

To the men even our victory can bring only sorrow and parting – but to you hope of joy for a

while.

I fear that to Arwen the Doom of Men may seem hard at the
ending."
'So it stood afterwards between Elrond and Aragorn, and they spoke no more of this matter,
but Aragorn went forth again to danger and toil.

And while the world darkened and fear fell on
Middle-earth, as the power of Sauron grew and the Barad-dur rose ever taller and stronger, Arwen
remained in Rivendell, and when Aragorn was abroad, from afar she watched over him in thought;
and in hope she made for him a great and kingly standard, such as only one might display who
claimed the lordship of the Númenoreans and the inheritance of Elendil.
'After a few years Gilraen took leave of Elrond and returned to her own people in Eriador, and
lived alone; and she seldom saw her son again, for he spent many years in far countries.

But on a
time, when Aragorn had returned to the North, he came to her, and she said to him before he went:
'"This is our last parting, Estel, my son.

"
'Aragorn tried to comfort her, saying: "Yet there may be a light beyond the darkness; and if so,
I would have you see it and be glad."
'But she answered only with this linnod ;
Ónen i-Estel Edain, ú-chebin estel anim,1
and Aragorn went away heavy of heart.

And it came to pass that in the hour of defeat Aragorn came up from the sea and
unfurled the standard of Arwen in the battle of the Fields of Pelennor, and in that day he was first
hailed as king.

And at last when all was done he entered into the inheritance of his fathers and
received the crown of Gondor and sceptre of Arnor; and at Midsummer in the year of the Fall of
Sauron he took the hand of Arwen Undómiel, and they were wedded in the city of the Kings.

But Arwen became as a
mortal woman, and yet it was not her lot to die until all that she had gained was lost.
'As Queen of Elves and Men she dwelt with Aragorn for six-score years in great glory and
bliss; yet at last he felt the approach of old age and knew that the span of his life -days was drawing
to an end, long though it had been.

Then Aragorn said to Arwen:
'"At last, Lady Evenstar, fairest in this world, and most be-loved, my world is fading.

"For if I will not go now, then I must soon go perforce.

"
'Then going to the House of the Kings in the Silent Street, Aragorn laid him down on the long
bed that had been prepared for him.

There he said farewell to Eldarion, and gave into his hands the
winged crown of Gondor and the sceptre of Arnor, and then all left him save Arwen, and she stood
alone by his bed.

She was not yet weary of her days, and thus she tasted the bitterness of the mortality
that she had taken upon her.
'"Lady Undómiel," said Aragorn, "the hour is indeed hard, yet it was made even in that day
when we met under the white birches in the garden of Elrond where none now walk.

Nay, lady, I am the last of the Númenoreans and the
latest King of the Elder Days; and to me has been given not only a span thrice that of Men of
Middle-earth, but also the grace to go at my will, and give back the gift.

The uttermost choice is before you: to repent and go to the Havens and bear away into the
West the memory of our days together that shall there be evergreen but never more than memory; or
else to abide the Doom of Men.

In sorrow we must go, but not in despair.

Galadriel had passed away and Celeborn also was gone,
and the land was silent.

'There at last when the mallorn-leaves were falling, but spring had not yet come, 1 she laid
herself to rest upon Cerin Amroth; and there is her green grave, until the world is changed, and all
the days of her life are utterly forgotten by men that come after, and elanor and niphredil bloom no
more east of the Sea.
'Here ends this tale, as it has come to us from the South; and with the passing of Evenstar no
more is said in this book of the days of old.'

II
The House of Eorl
'Eorl the Young was lord of the Men of Éothéod.

The forefathers, of Eorl claimed descent from kings of
Rhovanion, whose realm lay beyond Mirkwood before the invasions of the Wainriders, and thus
they accounted themselves kinsmen of the kings of Gondor descended from Eldacar.

'In the two thousand five hundred and tenth year of the Third Age a new peril threatened
Gondor.

The invaders overran Calenardhon, and Cirion, Steward of Gondor, sent north for help;
for there had been long friendship between the Men of Anduin's Vale and the people of Gondor.

At last tidings came to Eorl of the need of Gondor, and late though it seemed, he set out with
a great host of riders.

There the northern army of Gondor was in peril.

Cirion, therefore, in reward for his aid, gave
Calenardhon between Anduin and Isen to Eorl and his people; and they sent north for their wives
and children and their goods and sealed in that land.

They named it anew the Mark of the Riders,
and they called themselves the Eorlingas; but in Gondor their land was called Rohan, and its people
the Rohirrim (that is, the Horse-lords).

There the Rohirrim lived afterwards as free men under their own kings and laws, but in
perpetual alliance with Gondor.

Of his son, Fram, they tell that he slew Scatha, the great dragon of Ered Mithrin, and
the land had peace from the long-worms afterwards.

We are going to speak of a private matter alone.

Go and talk to my men!"

Four years later (2758) great troubles came to Rohan, and no help could be sent from Gondor,
for three fleets of the Corsairs attacked it and there was war on all its coasts.

The were in great
force, for they were joined by enemies of Gondor that landed in the mouths of Lefnui and Isen.

He would go out by himself, clad in white, and
stalk like a snow-troll into the camps of his enemies, and slay many men with his hands.

The Dunlendings said that if he
could find no food he ate men.

The Eastern invaders perished or withdrew; and there came help
at last from Gondor, by the roads both east and west of the mountains.

It was at the crowning of Fréaláf that Saruman appeared, bringing gifts, and speaking great
praise of the valour of the Rohirrim.

For this, Beren, Steward of Gondor, gave him leave, for Gondor still claimed
Isengard as a fortress of its realm, and not part of Rohan.

Though afterwards there was little doubt in men's minds that
Saruman went to Isengard in hope to find the Stone still there, and with the purpose of building up a
power of his own.

His friends and servants he drew then from all
who hated Gondor and Rohan, whether Men or other creatures more evil.

2512-70 Brego .

Brego died of grief the next year.

He was Brego's second son.

2594-2680 Fréawine .
2619-99 Goldwine .
2644-2718 Déor .

He was called by his people Léofa , for he was loved by all; he was
openhanded and a help to all the needy.

Rohan had
received great help from Gondor in the evil days.

When, therefore, he heard that the Haradrim were
assailing Gondor with great strength, he sent many men to the help of the Steward.

Turin II of Gondor sent to Folcwine a
rich weregild of gold.

He was greedy of food and of gold, and at strife with his marshals, and with his
children.

Thengel, his third child and only son, left Rohan when he came to manhood and lived long
in Gondor, and won honour in the service of Turgon.

He took no wife until late, but in 2943 he wedded Morwen of Lossarnach
in Gondor, though she was seventeen years the younger.

She bore him three children in Gondor, of
whom Théoden, the second, was his only son.

But he proved a good and wise king; though the speech of Gondor was used in
his house, and not all men thought that good.

For a while he rested in the land of his
birth, among the dead Kings of Gondor, but was brought back and laid in the eighth mound of his
line at Edoras.

Éomer
became a great king, and being young when he succeeded Théoden he reigned for sixty-five years,
longer than all their kings before him save Aldor the Old.

In the War of the Ring he made the
friendship of King Elessar, and of Imrahil of Dol Amroth; and he rode often to Gondor.

In Gondor the King Elessar now ruled, and
in Arnor also.

In all the lands of those realms of old he was king, save in Rohan only; for he
renewed to Éomer the gift of Cirion, and Éomer took again the Oath of Eorl.

After the end of the First Age the power and wealth of Khazad-dûm was much increased; for
it was enriched by many people and much lore and craft when the ancient cities of Nogrod and
Belegost in the Blue Mountains were ruined at the breaking of Thangorodrim.

The power of Sauron, servant of Morgoth, was then again growing in the world, though
the Shadow in the Forest that looked towards Moria was not yet known for what it was.

Thus they roused from sleep2
a thing of terror that, flying from Thangorodrim, had lain hidden at the foundations of the earth
since the coming of the Host of the West: a Balrog of Morgoth.

But there were dragons in the wastes beyond; and after many years they became strong again and
multiplied, and they made war on the Dwarves, and plundered their works.

So the rumour of the wealth of Erebor spread abroad and reached the ears of the dragons, and
at last Smaug the Golden, greatest of the dragons of his day, arose and without warning came
against King Thrór and descended on the Mountain in flames.

It was not long before all that realm
was destroyed, and the town of Dale near by was ruined and deserted; but Smaug entered into the
Great Hall and lay there upon a bed of gold.

But it
needs gold to breed gold.'

I go to see what I can find.'

Go and tell them
so!

In this way he got his name.

He had one eye blinded beyond cure,
and he was halt with a leg-wound; but he said: 'Good!

But now, if we must go without the rewards and the
weregilds that are owed to us, the sooner we return to our own lands the better pleased we shall be.'

But, as Thrór had said, the Ring needed gold to breed gold, and of that or any
other precious metal they had little or none.

The only power over them that the Rings wielded was to inflame their hearts with a greed of gold
and precious things, so that if they lacked them all other good things seemed profitless, and they
were filled with wrath and desire for vengeance on all who deprived them.

The lust for gold was ever in his mind.

At last, when he could endure it no
longer, he turned his thoughts to Erebor, and resolved to go back there.

Wolves pursued him,
Orcs waylaid him, evil birds shadowed his path, and the more he strove to go north the more
misfortunes opposed him.

In the morning he was gone from the camp, and his companions called him in vain.

They searched for him many days, until at last giving up hope they departed and came at length
back to Thorin.

Now they had fair halls in the mountains, and store of goods, and their days did not seem so
hard, though in their songs they spoke ever of the Lonely Mountain far away.

2 I, 54.

wrongs of his House and the vengeance upon the Dragon the he had inherited.

And beyond
them lay the desolation of the Dragon.

The Dragon Sauron might use with terrible effect.

Indeed I should have done so, if I
had known where to find you.'

For they say that you are wise and know more than any other
of what goes on in the world; and I have much on my mind and would be glad of your counsel.'
'I will come,' said Gandalf; 'for I guess that we share one trouble at least.

The Dragon of
Erebor is on my mind, and I do not think that he will be forgotten by the grandson of Thrór.'

The story is told elsewhere of what came of that meeting: of the strange plan that Gandalf
made for the help of Thorin, and how Thorin and his companions set out from the Shire on the quest
of the Lonely Mountain that came to great ends unforeseen.

The Dragon was slain by Bard of Esgaroth, but there was battle in Dale.

Even as
Gandalf said afterwards to Frodo and Gimli, when they dwelt together for a time in Minas Tirith.
Not long before news had come to Gondor of events far away.
'I grieved at the fall of Thorin,' said Gandalf; 'and now we hear that Dáin has fallen, fighting
in Dale again, even while we fought here.

'Yet things might have gone far otherwise and far worse.

Dragon-fire and savage swords in Eriador, night in Rivendell.

There might be no Queen
in Gondor.

They seldom walk abroad except at great need, They are in voice and appearance, and in
garb if they must go on a journey, so like to the dwarf-men that the eyes and ears of other peoples
cannot tell them apart.

He was named Elf-friend
because of the great love that grew between him and Legolas, son of King Thranduil, and because
of his reverence for the Lady Galadriel.

He and his people did great works in Gondor and Rohan.

Legolas his friend also brought south Elves out of Greenwood, and they dwelt in Ithilien, and it
became once again the fairest country in all the westlands.

But when King Elessar gave up his life Legolas followed at last the desire of his heart and
sailed over Sea.

We have heard tell that Legolas took Gimli Glóin's son with him because of their great
friendship, greater than any that has been between Elf and Dwarf.

The First Age ended with the Great Battle, in which the Host of Valinor broke Thangorodrim 1
and overthrew Morgoth.

The Second Age ended with the first overthrow of Sauron, servant of Morgoth, and the taking
of the One Ring.

The Third Age came to its end in the War of the Ring; but the Fourth Age was not held to
have begun until Master Elrond departed, and the time was come for the dominion of Men and the
1 I, 54.
2 II, 54; The Hobbit , 162

decline of all other 'speaking-peoples' in Middle-earth.1
In the Fourth Age the earlier ages were often called the Elder Days; but that name was
properly given only to the days before the casting out of Morgoth.

In Lindon south of the Lune dwelt for a time
Celeborn, kinsman of Thingol; his wife was Galadriel, greatest of Elven women.

She was sister of
Finrod Felagund, Friend-of-Men, once king of Nargothrond, who gave his life to save Beren son of
Barahir.

Many Dwarves leaving their old cities in Ered Luin go to Moria and swell its numbers.

Ar-Pharazôn the Golden seizes the sceptre.
3261.

Foundations of the Realms in Exile: Arnor and Gondor.

Sauron attacks Gondor, takes Minas Ithil and burns the White Tree.

Isildur escapes
down Anduin and goes to Elendil in the North.

Battle of Dagorlad and defeat of
Sauron.

Sauron passes away and the Ringwraiths go into the shadows.

The Dwarves hid themselves in deep places, guarding their hoards; but when
evil began to stir again and dragons reappeared, one by one their ancient treasures were plundered,
and they became a wandering people.

Ohtar brings the shards of Narsil to Imladris.

Falastur begins the line of Ship-kings of Gondor.

King Eärnil I takes Umbar, which becomes a fortress of Gondor.

Gondor reaches the height of its power.

Fornost and Tyrn
Gorthad are defended.

King Valacar of Gondor dies, and the civil war of the Kin-strife begins.

The Great Plague devastates Gondor.

The attacks of the Wainriders upon Gondor begin.

Gondor loses its eastern territories, and Narmacil II falls in battle.

King Calimehtar defeats the Wainriders on Dagorlad.
1900.

Gondor and Arnor renew communications and form an alliance.

Arvedui weds Fíriel
daughter of Ondoher of Gondor.

Arvedui claims the crown of
Gondor.

Eärnur brings a fleet to Lindon.

Eärnur becomes King of Gondor.

Gandalf goes to Dol Guldur.

Thorin I leaves Erebor, and goes north to the Grey Mountains, where most of the
remnants of Durin's Folk are now gathering.
2340.

About this time Déagol the Stoor finds the One Ring, and
is murdered by Sméagol.
2470.

About this time Sméagol-Gollum hides in the Misty Mountains.

Attack on Gondor renewed.

Brego son of Eorl completes the Golden Hall.
2570.

Baldor son of Brego enters the Forbidden Door and is lost.

About this time Dragons

reappear in the far North and begin to afflict the Dwarves.
2589.

Dáin I slain by a Dragon.
2590.

Grór his brother goes to the Iron Hills.

Gondor attacked by fleets of the
Corsairs.

Smaug the Dragon descends on Erebor.

He finds Thráin and
receives the key of Erebor.

Saruman overrules
him.1 Saruman begins to search near the Gladden Fields.

Belecthor II of Gondor dies.

Stirred up by emissaries of Sauron the Haradrim cross the Poros and attack Gondor.

The
sons of Folcwine of Rohan are slain in the service of Gondor.

Birth of Gilraen mother of Aragorn II.
2911.

Aragorn son of Arathorn II born on March 1st.
2933.

Gilraen takes Aragorn to Imladris.

Saruman discovers that Sauron's servants are searching the Anduin near Gladden Fields,
and that Sauron therefore has learned of Isildur's end.

Bilbo meets Sméagol-Gollum
and finds the Ring.

The White Council meets; Saruman agrees to an attack on Dol Guldur, since he
now wishes to prevent Sauron from searching the River.

Gollum leaves the Mountains and begins his
search for the 'thief' of the Ring.
2948.

Finduilas, daughter of Adrahil of Dol Amroth, born.
2951.

Gollum turns towards Mordor.

Arwen, newly returned from Lórien, meets Aragorn in the woods of Imladris.

Aragorn goes out into
the Wild.

Aragorn meets Gandalf and their friendship begins.
2957-80.

Aragorn undertakes his great journeys and errantries.

As Thorongil he serves in
disguise both Thengel of Rohan and Ecthelion II of Gondor.
2968.

Denethor weds Finduilas of Dol Amroth.
2977.

Aragorn enters Lórien and there meets again Arwen Undómiel.

Aragorn gives her the
ring of Barahir, and they plight their troth upon the hill of Cerin Amroth.

About this time Gollum
reaches the confines of Mordor and becomes acquainted with Shelob.

Denethor II becomes Steward of Gondor.

Finduilas dies young.
2989.

Gandalf seeks for news of Gollum and calls on the help of Aragorn.
3002.

Gandalf and Aragorn renew their hunt for Gollum at intervals during the next eight
years, searching in the vales of Anduin, Mirkwood, and Rhovanion to the confines of Mordor.

At

some time during these years Gollum himself ventured into Mordor, and was captured by Sauron.

Gollum is released from Mordor.

He is taken by Aragorn in the Dead Marshes, and
brought to Thranduil in Mirkwood.

About the same time Thranduil is attacked, and Gollum escapes.

August
All trace of Gollum is lost.

Théoden commands him to go: 'Take any horse, only be
gone ere tomorrow is old!'
21.

Glorfindel leaves Rivendell.
11.

Glorfindel finds Frodo at dusk.

Gollum begins to trail the Ring-bearer.

Gollum in hiding on the west bank observes the departure.

The Company pass the Argonath and camp at Parth Galen.

Aragorn sets out in pursuit
of the Orcs at evening.

Aragorn reaches the west-cliff at sunrise.

Éomer overtakes the Orcs just outside Fangorn Forest.
29.

Frodo descends from the Emyn Muil and meets Gollum.

Éomer returning to Edoras meets Aragorn.

Aragorn meets
Gandalf the White.

Aragorn overtaken by the Dúnedain in the early hours.

Aragorn sets out later.

Aragorn comes to Dunharrow at nightfall.

Aragorn takes the 'Paths of the Dead' at daybreak; he reaches Erech at midnight.

Aragorn sets out from Erech
and comes to Calembel.

Faramir
rescued by Gandalf outside the gates of the City.

Aragorn crosses Ringló.

Gollum visits Shelob, but seeing Frodo asleep nearly repents.

Aragorn reaches Linhir and crosses into Lebennin.

Gollum leads Frodo into Shelob's lair.

Aragorn drives the enemy towards Pelargir.

Frodo captured by the Orcs of Cirith Ungol.

Aragorn reaches Pelargir and captures the fleet.

Samwise finds Frodo in the Tower.

Aragorn raises the standard of Arwen.

Shagrat brings Frodo's cloak, mail-shirt, and sword to Barad-dûr.
18.

Aragorn dismisses the faint-hearted.

Gollum seizes the Ring and falls in the Cracks of Doom.

They sent their ambassadors to the crowning of King
Elessar; and their realms remained ever after, as long as they lasted, in friendship with Gondor; and
they were under the crown and protection of the King of the West.

The sons of Elrond meet the escort and bring Arwen to Edoras.

They set out for
Gondor.

25 King Elessar finds the sapling of the WhiteTree.

She had golden hair, which had been very rare in the Shire; but two others of Samwise's daughters were also
golden-haired, and so were many of the children born at this time.

the Fourth Age began in the reckoning of Gondor.

Goldilocks, daughter of Samwise, born.
1432.

Master Samwise and his wife and Elanor ride to Gondor and stay there for a year.

At his request the Thain makes
Fastred Warden of Westmarch.

Faramir Took marries Goldilocks, daughter of Samwise.
1469.

He took
counsel with his friend the Thain, and soon after they handed over their goods and offices to their
sons and rode away over the Sam Ford, and they were not seen again in the Shire.

Then he and Thain Peregrin went to Gondor and passed what short years were left to them in that
realm, until they died and were laid in Rath Dínen among the great of Gondor.
1541.

2 Fourth Age (Gondor) 120

beds of Meriadoc and Peregrin were set beside the bed of the great king.

Then Legolas built a grey
ship in Ithilien, and sailed down Anduin and so over Sea; and with him, it is said, went Gimli the
Dwarf.

The year no doubt was of the
same length,1 for long ago as those times are now reckoned in years and lives of men, they were not
very remote according to the memory of the Earth.

It is recorded by the Hobbits that they had no
'week' when they were still a wandering people, and though they had 'months', governed more or
less by the Moon, their keeping of dates and calculations of time were vague and inaccurate.

But owing to their general interest in
genealogy, and to the interest in ancient history which the learned amongst them developed after the
War of the Ring, the Shire-hobbits seem to have concerned themselves a good deal with dates; and
they even drew up complicated tables showing the relations of their own system with others.

The Númenorean system, as used in Númenor, and in Arnor and Gondor until the end of the
kings, was called King's Reckoning.

The meanings of these names, devised
by Men, had as a rule long been forgotten by the Hobbits, even in cases where they had originally
known what their significance was; and the forms of the names were much obscured in
consequence: math, for instance, at the end of some of them is a reduction of month.

The Hobbits took over this arrangement, but the meanings of their translated names were soon
forgotten, or no longer attended to, and the forms were much reduced, especially in everyday
pronunciation.

Some said that it was
old Sam Gardner's birthday, some that it was the day on which the Golden Tree first flowered in
1420, and some that it was the Elves' New Year.

Except at the end of words and before t this sound, was weakened to h in the speech of
Gondor, and that change has been recognized in a few names, such as Rohan , Rohirrim .

Pheriannath 'the
Halflings' (perian ); (c) in the middle of a few words where it represents a long ff (from pp ) as in
Ephel 'outer fence'; and (d) in Adûnaic, as in Ar-Pharazôn (pharaz 'gold').

SH, occurring in Westron, Dwarvish and Orkish, represents sounds similar to
1 Usually called in Sindarin Menelvagor (I, 54), Q. Menelmacar.

This nd is also seen in some ancient names
derived from an older period, such as Nargothrond , Gondolin , Beleriand .

In Gondor this y was usually pronounced like i .

