What do you mean?” be said. All of them at once,” said Bilbo. Very pretty!” said Gandalf. Good morning!” he said at last. What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!” said Gandalf.

Where else should I be?” said the wizard.

What can I do for you, my dwarves?” he said. Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,” said Kili. Throng!” thought Mr. Baggins. Some four, I should say by the sound,” said Fili.

“And for me, said Bifur. “And mince-pies and cheese, Confusticate and bebother these dwarves!” he said aloud. Of course!” said Thorin. and “please, don’t trouble! I can manage. s smoke-ring would go green and come back to hover over the wizard

said Thorin. “Bring out the instruments! Excuse me, I left mine in the porch!”

We like the dark,” said the dwarves. Hush!” said Gandalf. Excitable little fellow,” said Gandalf, as they sat down again.

Humph!” (or some snort more or less like that). Pardon me,” he said, Of course there is a mark,” said Gandalf. That’s right,” said Gandalf. It is a plan of the Mountain.” There is a dragon marked in red on the Mountain, said Balin, “There is one point that you haven’t noticed, It may have been secret once,” said Thorin,

He may-but he can’t have used it for years and years. In lots of ways,” said Gandalf. Also,” went on Gandalf, Keep it safe!” We might go from there up along the River Running,” went on Thorin taking no notice, That would be no good,” said the wizard, Very well then,” said Thorin, t you hear our song? and haven O very well,” said Thorin.

t know for certain, but I don s and my grandfather “I did not ‘get hold of it,’ I was given it,

Your grandfather,” said the wizard slowly and grimly, said Thorin; “we must give a thought to the Necromancer. Hear, hear!” said Bilbo, and accidentally said it aloud, What’s that?” they asked. Before we go, I suppose you mean,” said Thorin. t you the burglar? And isn

Don’t be a fool, Bilbo Baggins!” he said to himself,

What message?” said poor Mr. Baggins all in a fluster. I’m awfully sorry,” said Bilbo, t got any money. I didn Don’t be precise,” said Dwalin,

no” and some said

After all there are fourteen of us.” Others said: Never a blinking bit of manflesh have we had for long enough,” said a second. of to bring us into these parts at all, beats me – and the drink runnin Shut yer mouth!” he said as soon as he could. yer want? And time for a nice bit o Ha!” thought he warming to his new work as he lifted it carefully out,

It was! Trolls’ purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. “ ‘Ere, ‘oo are you? He wouldn’t make above a mouthful,” said William, who had already had a fine supper, P’raps there are more like him round about, and we might make a pie,” said Bert. Yes, lots,” said Bilbo, before he remembered not to give his friends away. he said immediately afterwards. “What d’yer mean? What I say,” said Bilbo gasping. Not till he says what he means by lots and none at all,” said Bert. I won’t have it,” said William. “You’re a fat fool, William, t take that from you. Bill Huggins,” says Bert, and puts his fist in William There’s more to come yet,” said Tom, I reckon you’re right,” said Bert,

t need to see his friends It’s trolls!” said Bilbo from behind a tree. They had forgotten all about him. said he. “O! are they? Don’t start the argument all over-again. Bill,” he said, t got no water, and it s. “Shut up!” said they, “or we Shut up yerself!” said Tom, who thought it was William’s voice. s arguing but you. I Don’t talk to yerself!” said Tom. That I never did!” said Tom.

Now stop it!” said Tom and Bert together. Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-picking,” said Bombur, s just what you wouldn Would this be any good?” asked Bilbo, when they were getting tired and angry.

Exactly!” said Thorin; Don’t interrupt!” said Gandalf.

Of course not!” said Balin. We must not miss the road, or we shall be done for,” he said.

Well, well!” said a voice. You are a little out of your way,” said the elf: Mind Bilbo doesn’t eat all the cakes!” they called.

I could not say,” said Elrond, A wish that is likely to be granted soon enough in the mountains!” said Elrond. What is this?” he said. Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you cannot see them,” said Elrond, Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks,” read Elrond, “Then what is Durin’s Day? The first day of the dwarves’ New Year,” said Thorin,

“That remains to be seen, Is there any more writing?”

The summer is getting on down below,” thought Bilbo,

This won’t do at all!” said Thorin. they said, “not far round the next corner; and ponies and all could get inside.

Who are these miserable persons?” said the Great Goblin. What do you mean by it?” said the Great Goblin turning to Thorin. Thorin the dwarf at your service!” he replied-it was merely a polite nothing. Urn!” said the Great Goblin. He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!” said one of the drivers.

Quicker, quicker!” said the voice. “Half a minute! Are we all here?” said he, handing his sword back to Thorin with a bow. he shouted. “Draw your sword, Thorin!

Go back?” he thought.

s a choice feast; at least a tasty morsel it

Sssss,” said Gollum, and became quite polite. Easy!” said Bilbo. t answer, we eats it, my preciousss. If it asks us, and we doesn Chestnuts, chestnuts,” he hissed. Sss, sss, my preciouss,” he said.

Well, what is it?” he said. Give us a chance; let it give us a chance, my preciouss-ss-ss.” Eggses!” he hissed. Half a moment,” said the hobbit shivering. Ugh!” he said, -and so he guessed. “Fish! Fish!

Not fair! not fair!” he hissed. he said louder. “S-s-s-s-s, Wrong,” said Bilbo, who had luckily just taken his hand out again. Wrong!” said Bilbo, who had lost his some time ago. Come on!” said Bilbo.

Well?” he said. Never you mind,” said Bilbo. “Cross it is, impatient, precious, Quite safe, yes,” he whispered to himself. t see us, will it, my precious? No. It won Where is it? Where iss it?” Bilbo heard him crying. “What’s the matter? What have you lost?” Well, so am I,” cried Bilbo, No, not yet, precious!” Gollum answered. But you never guessed my last question, and you promised,” said Bilbo.

But it wasn’t a fair question,” said Gollum. Oh well, if it’s a matter of ordinary questions,” Bilbo replied, Curse it! curse it! curse it!” hissed Gollum. s no good going back there to search, no. We doesn t know what the present can do, does it? It t know, and it can s lost itself, the nassty nosey thing. It doesn s tricksy. It doesn t say what it The goblinses will catch it then. It can’t get out that way, precious.” ll find it, they

Seven right, yes. Six left, yes!” he whispered. t go in, precious, no we durstn

This way!” some yelled.

Good heavens!” he exclaimed. After all he is my friend,” said the wizard, He has been more trouble than use so far,” said one. You would have dropped him,” said Dori,

said Balin, “and I take off my hood to you. what’s in my pocket?’ And he couldn’t guess in three goes. So I said: What about guards?” they asked. What did I tell you?” said Gandalf laughing. I must see if I can’t find a more or less decent giant to block it up again,” said Gandalf, A very ticklish business, it was,” he said.

They made that gate ages ago,” he said, O yes!” he said in answer to more questions from the hobbit. Can’t help it,” said Gandalf, “No thank you! Well! that has got us on a bit,” said Gandalf;

s beard wagging beside him, and so quiet that he could hear the dwarves “A bit further, What shall we do, what shall we do!” he cried. I can’t be always carrying burglars on my back,” said Dori, “He’ll be eaten if we don’t ‘do something,

Go away! little boys!” shouted Gandalf in answer. em, fry and roast my arms, my arms!”; but Dori groaned

No you don’t!” be heard Dori answering, t. Also eagles aren prisoners’ had meant Very well,” said Gandalf.

Don’t pinch!” said his eagle. Farewell!” they cried, I always meant to see you all safe (if possible) over the mountains,” said the wizard, I am not going to disappear this very instant,” said he.

We shall see, we shall see!” he said, Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!” said Gandalf.

If one was to sting me,” he thought, We are getting near,” said Gandalf. You had better wait here,” said the wizard to the dwarves; Ugh! here they are!” he said to the horses. Never heard of him,” growled the man, I am a wizard,” continued Gandalf. Goblins?” said the big man less gruffly.

Or two? I can only see one, and a little one at that,” said Beorn. “Go on, call away! I don’t need your service, thank you,” said Beorn, “Go on telling, then! Hullo!” said Beorn. “As soon as we were asleep, Troop, was right,” he said.

Where was 1? O yes– I was not grabbed. I killed a goblin or two with a flash- It is some good being a wizard, then.” “ “A dozen! That That’s enough!” said Beorn. s the first time I I wish I had been there! I would have given them more than fireworks!” A very good tale!” said he.

Yes, please!” they all said together.

Get up lazybones,” he said, Breakfast!” he cried. “Mostly inside us, I will answer the second question first,” he said,

What shall we do,” he cried, “So I did. And don’t be silly! You had better go to bed, your wits are sleepy. So here you all are still!” he said. He picked up the hobbit and laughed: Little bunny is getting nice and fat again on bread and honey,” he chuckled. s nose and the death from the wizard It was a good story, that of yours,” said Beorn, What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?” asked Bilbo suddenly.

The goblins,” Beorn had said,

Well, here is Mirkwood!” said Gandalf. What about the horse, then?” said Thorin. Now we had this all out before, when we landed on the Carrock,” he said. Don’t you worry!” said Thorin.

Good-bye!” said Gandalf to Thorin. Yes, you do!” said the wizard, No! no!” said Bilbo. t need me to tell you tales of that black sorcerer. I don Very comforting you are to be sure,” growled Thorin. “Good-bye then, and really good-bye!

“Can any of you throw a rope? I don’t believe it is tied,” said Bilbo, “Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and still has the best sight,

Not far enough!” said Bilbo who was peering forward. Steady!” said Bilbo, I shall,” said Thorin, “I’m always last and I don’t like it, Get in now,” said Fili,

Why ever did I wake up!” he cried. You need not try,” said Thorin.

No you don’t!” they said. m just going to lie here and sleep and dream of food, if I can said Thorin. “But without a feast we shan’t remain alive much longer anyway, t be frightened of him-(‘What about me of them?

I was having such a lovely dream,” he grumbled, Good heavens! he has gone like Bombur,” they said. t any good, and we can

I will give you a name,” he said to it, s advice, and Gandalf It was a sharp struggle, but worth it,” said one. ll wager there is good juice inside.” “Aye, they Don’t hang ‘em too long,” said a third. “Kill’em, I say, re dead now, I You were quite right,” they said, s alive and kicking!” “ “I

Fili or Kili,” he thought by the tip of a blue hood sticking out at the top. s got a sting has he? Well, we Come down! Come down!” he shouted to the dwarves on the branch.

I am going to disappear,” he said. Lazy Lob” and Go on! Go on!” he shouted.

m blest! So that

We did not attack them,” answered Thorin;

What have we done, O king?” said Balin, who was the eldest left.

Now come with me,” he said, Very good,” laughed the chief of the guards. No time now!” said the hobbit. t argue, there

That will save him some of the trouble he is in for,” said Mr. Baggins to himself. Where’s old Galion, the butler?” said one. I shall be angry if the old slowcoach is late,” said another. Ha, ha!” came a cry. You’re all late,” he grumbled. Small wonder,” said they, Save us, Galion!” cried some, “Get on with the work! Very well, very well,” they answered rolling the barrels to the opening.

This is a heavy load!” some grumbled. No time now!” cried the raftman.

I hope I never smell the smell of apples again!” said Fili. Well! Here we are!” said Thorin. said Bilbo, “What else is there? And who are these?” he asked, pointing to Fili and: Kili and Bilbo. “If you come in peace lay down your arms!

Let them go and bother Smaug, and see how he welcomes them!” he thought. s son Thror

There lies all that is left of Dale,” said Balin.

Let us return!” he said. That does not prove it,” said Balin,

I am too fat for such fly-walks,” he said. And next year after that,” said Dwalin, Good Gracious!” he thought,

The key! The key!” cried Bilbo. The key!” shouted Bilbo.

Now you are in for it at last, Bilbo Baggins,” he said to himself.

indeed! Well, we

he gasped. “The door! The tunnel! It’s no good here. They will be slain, and all our ponies too, and all out stores lost,” moaned the others. Nonsense!” said Thorin, recovering his dignity. What else do you suppose a burglar is to do?” asked Bilbo angrily.

Never mind that for the moment! What are we to do now, to-day?” Old Smaug is weary and asleep,” he thought. t, see me and he won “So I can well believe, Lovely titles!” sneered the dragon.

That’s better!” said Smaug. I thought so last night,” he smiled to himself. m a lizard. I haven “Very well, O Barrel-rider! Don’t talk to me!” said Smaug. I suppose you got a fair price for that cup last night?” he went on. said he. “Not gold alone brought us hither. Ha! Ha! You admit the ‘us’,” laughed Smaug. I tell you,” he said, in an effort to remain loyal to his friends and to keep his end up,

I have always understood,” said Bilbo in a frightened squeak, Your information is antiquated,” he snapped. I might have guessed it,” said Bilbo. Drat the bird!” said Bilbo crossly. Leave him alone!” said Thorin.

Why what has happened?” cried the dwarves. You are very gloomy, Mr. Baggins!” said Thorin. t know, I don We knew it would be a desperate venture,” said Thorin,

Shut the door!” he begged them. Barrel-rider!” he snorted.

Let us try the door!” he said.

We are trapped!” they groaned. Come, come!” he said. s life there Now do be careful!” whispered the hobbit, Light!” he cried.

Now I am a burglar indeed!” thought he. Now what on earth or under it has happened?” said Thorin. Come, one of you, get another light or two!” Thorin ordered. It is about our turn to help,” said Balin,

Mr. Baggins!” he cried. I feel magnificent,” he thought; You speak the truth! This is the great chamber of Thror,” said Thorin; said Thorin. “From here it hastens to the Gate. Let us follow it!

Well!” said Bilbo, It seems to be late morning,” he said, s front doorstep is the safest place for a meal. Do let Dear me!” grumbled the hobbit. “That won’t be till Smaug’s dead, We must move away from here,” said Don. It’s a cold lonesome place,” said Bombur. “Come on! Come on!

Here,” said Balin, We must take our chance of that,” said Thorin.

Look!” said one. “Perhaps the King under the Mountain is forging gold, Which king?” said another with a grim voice. You are always foreboding gloomy things!” said the others. The King beneath the Mountain!” they shouted. The dragon is coming or I am a fool!” he cried.

Wait! Wait!” it said to him. Arrow!” said the bowman.

If only he had not been killed,” they all said, Bard is not lost!” he cried. “King Bard! King Bard! Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth,” he said. “We will have King Bard!

Fools!” said Bard. That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin Oakenshield, I fear,” said the king.

Something strange is happening,” said Thorin. There is that old thrush again!” he cried. I believe he is trying to tell us something,” said Balin; Not very well,” said Bilbo (as a matter of fact, he could make nothing of it at all); We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am sure,” said Balin.

Yes, dead,” said Rac. “I will not say if this counsel be good or bad, Back now to the Mountain!” cried Thorin.

They have come!” called Balin. Who are you,” he called in a very loud voice,

“A just question,

In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,” one cried, Since such is your answer, The whole place still stinks of dragon,” he grumbled to himself,

For the Arkenstone of my father,” he said, Winter and snow will bite both men and elves,” he said, said Bombur. “I wish we could have a fire up here as they have in the camp! I daresay; but I am bound here till midnight,” grumbled the fat dwarf.

“Not as stiff as my legs, Off you go!” said Bilbo. That was no fish!” one said. Let’s have a light!” he said. I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,” he answered, Indeed!” said they, Really you know,” Bilbo was saying in his best business manner, “Well, let him! Such a fool deserves to starve.”

My dear Bard!” squeaked Bilbo. You may see it!” said he. This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,” said Bilbo, O well!” said the hobbit uncomfortably. Bilbo Baggins!” he said. Thank you very much I am sure,” said Bilbo with a bow. Well done! Mr. Baggins!” he said, clapping Bilbo on the back.

That will be Dain!” said Thorin when he heard. Hail Thorin!” said Bard. he said. “Why should I purchase my own? “We are not thieves, shouted Thorin in gathering rage. “I gave it them! You! You!” cried Thorin, turning upon him and grasping him with both hands. t like my Burglar, please don You all seem in league!” said Thorin dropping Bilbo on the top of the wall. Dear me! Dear me!” said Bilbo. I am betrayed,” he said. Get down now to your friends!” he said to Bilbo, You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain,” said Gandalf.

Farewell!” he cried to them. “Not so hasty! We are sent from Dain son of Nain,” they said when questioned. Fools!” laughed Bard,

Come!” called Gandalf. To the Mountain!” called Bard.

It will not be long now,” thought Bilbo, The Eagles! The Eagles!” he shouted.

Now I wonder what has happened?” he said to himself. Hullo there!” he called with a shaky voice. Well I’m blessed!” said he.

It is well that I have found you!” said the man striding forward. A nasty knock on the head, I think,” said Bilbo. “I will carry you down to the camp in the valley, Baggins!” he exclaimed. Hail! Thorin,” he said as he entered. Farewell, good thief,” he said. No!” said Thorin.

Some are in the hunt,” said the wizard, I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to see them again,” said Bilbo sleepily; There let it lie till the Mountain falls!” he said. Very kind of you,” said Bilbo. t know. And I don Farewell, Balin!” he said;

If ever you are passing my way,” said Bilbo, Farewell! O Elvenking!” said Gandalf. Farewell! O Gandalf!” said the king. I beg of you,” said Bilbo stammering and standing on one foot, In what way have I earned such a gift, O hobbit?” said the king. I will take your gift, O Bilbo the Magnificent!” said the king gravely.

Ere long now,” Gandalf was saying, It would be well indeed,” said Elrond; s in the free-top, the wind Well, Merry People!” said Bilbo looking out. A little sleep does a great cure in the house of Elrond,” said he; Merry is May-time!” said Bilbo, as the rain beat into his face.

Indeed I can!” said the wizard. My dear Bilbo!” he said.

Of course!” said Gandalf.

