The tunnel wound on
and on, going fairly but not quite straight into the side of the hill – The Hill, as all the people for
many miles round called it – and many little round doors opened out of it, first on one side and then
on another.

The best rooms were all on the left-hand side (going in), for
these were the only ones to have windows, deep-set round windows looking over his garden and
meadows beyond, sloping down to the river.

The Bagginses had lived
in the neighbourhood of The Hill for time out of mind, and people considered them very
respectable, not only because most of them were rich, but also because they never had any
adventures or did anything unexpected: you could tell what a Baggins would say on any question
without the bother of asking him.

As I was saying, the mother of this hobbit – of Bilbo Baggins, that is – was the
fabulous Belladonna Took, one of the three remarkable daughters of the Old Took, head of the
hobbits who lived across The Water, the small river that ran at the foot of The Hill.

Bungo, that was Bilbo’s father, built the
most luxurious hobbit-hole for her (and partly with her money) that was to be found either under
The Hill or over The Hill or across The Water, and there they remained to the end of their days.

He had not been down that way under
The Hill for ages and ages, not since his friend the Old Took died, in fact, and the hobbits had
almost forgotten what he looked like.

He had been away over The Hill and across The Water on
business of his own since they were all small hobbit-boys and hobbit-girls.

Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his legs,
and blew out a beautiful grey ring of smoke that sailed up into the air without breaking and floated
away over The Hill.

You might
try over The Hill or across The Water.”

Bilbo stood still and watched-he loved smoke-rings-and then be blushed to think how proud he had
been yesterday morning of the smoke-rings he had sent up the wind over The Hill.

It was a beautiful gold-en harp, and when Thorin struck it the music
began all at once, so sudden and sweet that Bilbo forgot everything else, and was swept away into
dark lands under strange moons, far over The Water and very far from his hobbit-hole under The
Hill.

The dark came into the room from the little window that opened in the side of The Hill; the
firelight flickered-it was April-and still they played on, while the shadow of Gandalf’s beard
wagged against the wall.

“Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away ere break of day
To seek the pale enchanted gold.

Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,
To claim our long-forgotten gold.

The mountain smoked beneath the moon;
The dwarves, they heard the tramp of doom.

Far over the misty mountains grim

To dungeons deep and caverns dim
We must away, ere break of day,
To win our harps and gold from him!”

Then something Tookish woke up inside him, and he wished to go and see the
great mountains, and hear the pine-trees and the waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear a sword
instead of a walking-stick.

He thought of the jewels of the dwarves shining in dark caverns.

Suddenly in the wood
beyond The Water a flame leapt up–probably somebody lighting a wood-fire-and he thought of
plundering dragons settling on his quiet Hill and kindling it all to flames.

He shuddered; and very
quickly he was plain Mr. Baggins of Bag-End, Under-Hill, again.

“It is a plan of the Mountain.”

“I remember the Mountain well enough and the lands about it.

“There is a dragon marked in red on the Mountain, said Balin, “but it will be easy enough to
find him without that, if ever we arrive there.”

Old Smaug had lived there long enough now to find out anything there is to know about
those caves.”

From what it says on the map I should guess there is a closed door which has
been made to look exactly like the side of the Mountain.

“We might go from there up along the River Running,” went on Thorin taking no notice, “and
so to the ruins of Dale-the old town in the valley there, under the shadow of the Mountain.

The river runs right out of it through the great cliff at the
South of the Mountain, and out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed.”

“Long ago in my grandfather Thror’s time our family was driven
out of the far North, and came back with all their wealth and their tools to this Mountain on the
map.

Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and
my grandfather was King under the Mountain again and treated with great reverence by the mortal
men, who lived to the South, and were gradually spreading up the Running River as far as the valley
overshadowed by the Mountain.

They built the merry town of Dale there in those days.

The first we heard
of it was a noise like a hurricane coming from the North, and the pine-trees on the Mountain
creaking and cracking in the wind.

Some of the dwarves who happened to be outside (I was one
luckily -a fine adventurous lad in those days, always wandering about, and it saved my life that
day)-well, from a good way off we saw the dragon settle on our mountain in a spout of flame.

The river rushed up in
steam and a fog fell on Dale, and in the fog the dragon came on them and destroyed most of the
warriors-the usual unhappy story, it was only too common in those days.

What goes on there now I don’t know for certain, but I don’t suppose anyone lives
nearer to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now-a-days.

Your father went away to try his
luck with the map after your grandfather was killed; and lots of adventures of a most unpleasant sort
he had, but he never got near the Mountain.

The dragon and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for
you!”
“Hear, hear!” said Bilbo, and accidentally said it aloud, “Hear what?”

As
he lay in bed he could hear Thorin still humming to himself in the best bedroom next to him:
“Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,
To find our long-forgotten gold.”

Just then all the
others came round the corner of the road from the village.

Not far ahead were dreary hills, rising higher and higher, dark with trees.

On some of them were old
castles with an evil look, as if they had been built by wicked people.

Wind got up, and the willows along the river-bank bent and sighed.

I don’t know what river it
was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of the last few days, that came down from the hills
and mountains in front of them.

The winds broke up the grey clouds, and a
waning moon appeared above the hills between the flying rags.

So far
they had not camped before on this journey, and though they knew that they soon would have to
camp regularly, when they were among the Misty Mountains and far from the lands of respectable
people, it seemed a bad wet evening to begin, on.

He got into the
river before they could catch him; and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili were nearly
drowned, and all the baggage that he carried was washed away off him.

There was a hill some way off
with trees on it, pretty thick in parts.

Others said: “These parts are none too well known, and are too near the
mountains.

They came to
the hill and were soon in the wood.

Up the hill they went; but there was no proper path to be seen,
such as might lead to a house or a farm; and do what they could they made a deal of rustling and
crackling and creaking (and a good deal of grumbling and drafting), as they went through the trees
in the pitch dark.

You’ve et a village and a half between yer, since we come down from
the mountains.

For just at that moment the light came over the hill, and there was a mighty twitter in the
branches.

And there they stand to this day, all alone, unless the birds
perch on them; for trolls, as you probably know, must be underground before dawn, or they go back
to the stuff of the mountains they are made of, and never move again.

Don’t you realize that the trolls must have a cave or a
hole dug somewhere near to hide from the sun in?

They followed the tracks up the hill, until hidden by bushes they came on a big door of stone
leading to a cave.

Then they I brought up their ponies,
and carried away the pots of gold, and buried them very secretly not far from the track by the river,
putting a great many spells over them, just in case they ever had the-chance to come back and
recover them.

It was they who told me that three of them had come down from the mountains and
settled in the woods not far from the road; they had frightened everyone away from the district, and
they waylaid strangers.

One morning they
forded a river at a wide shallow place full of the noise of stones and foam.

When they got to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw that the great mountains
had marched down very near to them.

“Is that The Mountain?” asked Bilbo in a solemn voice, looking at it with round eyes.

“That is only the
beginning of the Misty Mountains, and we have to get through, or over, or under those somehow,
before we can come into Wilderland beyond.

And it is a deal of a way even from the other side of
them to the Lonely Mountain in the East Where Smaug lies on our treasure.”
“O!” said Bilbo, and just at that moment he felt more fared than he ever remembered feeling
before.

“We
need food, for one thing, and rest in reasonable safety-also it is very necessary to tackle the Misty
Mountains by the proper path, or else you will get lost in them, and have to come back and start at
the beginning again (if you ever get back at all).”

That sounded nice and comforting, but they had not got there yet, and it was not so easy
as it sounds to find the Last Homely House west of the Mountains.

There seemed to be no trees and
no valleys and no hills to break the ground in front of them, only one vast slope going slowly up
and up to meet the feet of the nearest mountain, a wide land the colour of heather and crumbling
rock, with patches and slashes of grass-green and moss-green showing where water might be.

They were growing anxious, for they now saw that the house might be hidden almost anywhere

between them and the mountains.

It was indeed a much
wider land from the ford to the mountains than ever you would have guessed.

The river is flowing!

On they all went,
leading their ponies, till they were brought to a good path and so at last to the very brink of the
river.

It was flowing fast and noisily, as mountain-streams do of a summer evening, when sun has
been all day on the snow far up above.

Their bags were filled
with food and provisions light to carry but strong to bring them over the mountain passes.

“I could not say,” said Elrond, “but one may guess that your trolls had plundered other
plunderers, or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold in the mountains of the North.

I
have heard that there are still forgotten treasures of old to be found in the deserted caverns of the
mines of Moria, since the dwarf and goblin war.”

“A wish that is likely to be granted soon enough in the mountains!” said Elrond.

He took it and gazed long at it, and he shook his head; for if he did not
altogether approve of dwarves and their love of gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness,
and he grieved to remember the ruin of the town of Dale and its merry bells, and the burned banks
of the bright River Running.

Now they rode away amid songs of
farewell and good speed, with their hearts ready for more adventure, and with a knowledge of the
road they must follow over the Misty Mountains to the land beyond.

Chapter 4
Over Hill and Under Hill
There were many paths that led up into those mountains, and many passes over them.

Boulders, too, at times came
galloping down the mountain-sides, let loose by midday sun upon the snow, and passed among
them (which was lucky), or over their heads (which was alarming).

The nights were comfortless and
chill, and they did not dare to sing or talk too loud, for the echoes were uncanny, and the silence
seemed to dislike being broken-except by the noise of water and the wail of wind and the crack of
stone.

And the others were thinking equally gloomy thoughts, although when they had said
good-bye to Elrond in the high hope of a midsummer morning, they’ had spoken gaily of the
passage of the mountains, and of riding swift across the lands beyond.

They had thought of coming
to the secret door in the Lonely Mountain, perhaps that very next first moon of Autumn-“ and
perhaps it will be Durin’s Day” they had said.

He knew that something unexpected might happen, and he hardly dared to hope that they
would pass without fearful adventure over those great tall mountains with lonely peaks and valleys
where no king ruled.

You know how terrific a really big thunderstorm can be down in
the land and in a river-valley; especially at times when two great thunderstorms meet and clash.

More terrible still are thunder and lightning in the mountains at night, when storms come up from
East and West and make war.

The lightning splinters on the peaks, and rocks shiver, and great
crashes split the air and go rolling and tumbling into every cave and hollow; and the darkness is
filled with overwhelming noise and sudden light.

They could hear the giants guffawing and
shouting all over the mountainsides.

“We have found a
dry cave,” they said, “not far round the next corner; and ponies and all could get inside.”
“Have you thoroughly explored it?” said the wizard, who knew that caves up in the mountains
were seldom unoccupied.

That, of course, is the dangerous part about caves: you don’t know how far they go back,
sometimes, or where a passage behind may lead to, or what is waiting for you inside.

If you stepped behind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain.

He lit up his
wand – as he did that day in Bilbo’s dining-room that seemed so long ago, if you remember-, and by
its light they explored the cave from end to end.

He
dreamed that a crack in the wall at the back of the cave got bigger and bigger, and opened wider and
wider, and he was very afraid but could not call out or do anything but lie and look.

Then he
dreamed that the floor of the cave was giving way, and he was slipping-beginning to fall down,
down, goodness knows where to.

A crack had opened at the back of the cave, and was already a wide passage.

It had wakened him up wide in a splintered second,
and when goblins came to grab him, there was a terrible flash like lightning in the cave, a smell like
gunpowder, and several of them fell dead.

It was deep, deep, dark, such as only goblins that have taken to living in the heart of the
mountains can see through.

And down down to Goblin-town
You go, my lad!
Clash, crash!

The general meaning of the song was only too plain; for
now the goblins took out whips and whipped them with a swish, smack!, and set them running as
fast as they could in front of them; and more than one of the dwarves were already yammering and
bleating like anything, when they stumbled into a big cavern.

They all laughed and stamped and
clapped their hands, when the dwarves (with poor little Bilbo at the back and nearest to the whips)
came running in, while the goblin-drivers whooped and cracked their whips behind.

I am afraid that was the last they ever saw of those excellent little ponies, including a jolly
sturdy little white fellow that Elrond had lent to Gandalf, since his horse was not suitable for the
mountain-paths.

The goblins chained their hands behind their backs and linked them all together in a
line and dragged them to the far end of the cavern with little Bilbo tugging at the end of the row.

“Dwarves, and this!” said one of
the drivers, pulling at Bilbo’s chain so that he fell forward onto his knees.

We sheltered from a storm in what seemed a
convenient cave and unused; nothing was further from our thoughts than inconveniencing goblins in
any way whatever.”

Might I ask what you were doing up in the
mountains at all, and where you were coming from, and where you were going to?

“We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, second, and
third cousins, and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live on the East side of these truly
hospitable mountains,” said Thorin, not quite knowing what to say all at once in a moment, when
obviously the exact truth would not do at all.

“He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!” said one of the drivers.

“Several of our people were
struck by lightning in the cave, when we invited these creatures to come below; and they are as
dead as stones.

It had killed
hundreds of goblins in its time, when the fair elves of Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle
before their walls.

Just at that moment all the lights in the
cavern went out, and the great fire went off poof!

Not for a long
while did they stop, and by that time they must have been right down in the very mountain’s heart.

It
burned with a rage that made it gleam if goblins were about; now it was bright as blue flame for
delight in the killing of the great lord of the cave.

“So it is a pool or a lake, and not an underground river,” he thought.

There are strange things living in the pools and lakes in
the hearts of mountains: fish whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows how many years ago,
and never swam out again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger and bigger from trying to see in
the blackness; also there are other things more slimy than fish.

Even in the tunnels and caves the
goblins have made for themselves there are other things living unbeknown to them that have
sneaked in from outside to lie up in the dark.

Some of these caves, too, go back in their beginnings
to ages before the goblins, who only widened them and joined them up with passages, and the
original owners are still there in odd comers, slinking and nosing about.

They very seldom did, for they had a feeling that something unpleasant was lurking
down there, down at the very roots of the mountain.

Asking them, and sometimes guessing them, had been the only game he had ever
played with other funny creatures sitting in their holes in the long, long ago, before he lost all his
friends and was driven away, alone, and crept down, down, into the dark under the mountains.

“Mountain, I suppose.”
“Does it guess easy?

“Thirty white horses on a red hill,
First they champ,

But just as Bilbo was beginning to hope that the wretch would not be able to answer,
Gollum brought up memories of ages and ages and ages before, when he lived with his grandmother
in a hole in a bank by a river, “Sss, sss, my preciouss,” he said.

It lies behind stars and under hills,
And empty holes it fills.

But suddenly Gollum remembered thieving from nests long ago, and sitting under the river
bank teaching his grandmother, teaching his grandmother to suck-“Eggses!”

This is what he said:
“This thing all things devours:
Birds, beasts, trees, flowers;
Gnaws iron, bites steel;

Grinds hard stones to meal;
Slays king, ruins town,
And beats high mountain down.”

“A bit low for goblins, at least for the big ones,” thought Bilbo, not knowing that even the big ones,
the ores of the mountains, go along at a great speed stooping low with their hands almost on the
ground.

He could see outside into the
open air: there were a few steps running down into a narrow valley between tall mountains; the sun
came out from behind a cloud and shone bright on the outside of the door-but he could not get
through.

He wandered on and on, till the sun began to sink
westwards-behind the mountains.

“I seem to have got right to the other side of the Misty
Mountains, right to the edge of the Land Beyond!

The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded explaining his cleverness more
than once, so now he had told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had been well aware of the presence of
evil goblins in that part of the mountains.

“I must see if I can’t find a more or less decent giant to block it up again,” said Gandalf, “or
soon there will be no getting over the mountains at all.”

He
followed after the drivers and prisoners right to the edge of the great hall, and there he sat down and
worked up the best magic he could in the shadows.

As a matter of fact it was well known to anybody who was acquainted with this part of the
mountains; but it took a wizard to keep his head in the tunnels and guide them in the right direction.

We have gone miles and miles, and come right down through the heart of the mountains,
and are now on the other side-quite a short cut.

He nibbled a bit of
sorrel, and he drank from a small mountain-stream that crossed the path, and he ate three wild
strawberries that he found on its bank, but it was not much good.

They slid into the edge of a
climbing wood of pines that here stood right up the mountain slope from the deeper darker forests
of the valleys below.

The sun had long gone behind the
mountains.

They limped along now as fast as they were able down the gentle slopes of a pine forest in

a slanting path leading steadily southwards.

At times they were pushing through a sea of bracken
with tall fronds rising right above the hobbit’s head; at times they were marching along quiet as
quiet over a floor of pine-needles; and all the while the forest-gloom got heavier and the
forest-silence deeper.

All of a sudden they heard a howl away down hill, a long shuddering howl.

To hear it out in the forest under the moon
was too much for Bilbo.

Even magic rings are not much use against wolves-especially against the
evil packs that lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested mountains, over the Edge of the Wild
on the borders of the unknown.

Goblins do not usually venture very far from
their mountains, unless they are driven out and are looking for new homes, or are marching to war
(which I am glad to say has not happened for a long while).

In spite of the dangers of this far land bold men had of late been making their way back into it
from the South, cutting down trees, and building themselves places to live in among the more
pleasant woods in the valleys and along the river-shores.

But now they had planned with the goblins’ help to come by night upon some of the
villages nearest the mountains.

If their plan had been carried out, there would have been none left
there next day; all would have been killed except the few the goblins kept from the wolves and
carried back as prisoners to their caves.

And long before that, they said, goblin soldiers would be coming down from the
mountains; and goblins can climb trees, or cut them down.

The rage of the wolves was terrible to see, and
the commotion they made filled all the forest.

“What’s all this uproar in the forest tonight?” said the Lord of the Eagles.

He was sitting,
black in the moonlight, on the top of a lonely pinnacle of rock at the eastern edge of the mountains.

The
lord of the eagles of the Misty Mountains had eyes that could look at the sun unblinking, and could
see a rabbit moving on the ground a mile below even in the moonlight.

Also he could see the
glint of the moon on goblin spears and helmets, as long lines of the wicked folk crept down the
hillsides from their gate and wound into the wood.

But the ancient race of the northern mountains were the greatest of all birds; they were
proud and strong and noble-hearted.

When they took any
notice of them at all (which was seldom, for they did not eat such creatures ), they swooped on them
and drove them shrieking back to their caves, and stopped whatever wickedness they were doing.

The goblins hated the eagles and feared them, but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive them
from the mountains.

Tonight the Lord of the Eagles was filled with curiosity to know what was afoot; so he
summoned many other eagles to him, and they flew away from the mountains, and slowly circling
ever round and round they came down, down, down towards the ring of the wolves and the
meeting-place of the goblins.

The wolves that had caught fire and fled into the forest had set it alight in several places.

It was high
summer, and on this eastern side of the mountains there had been little rain for some time.

So you can imagine how his head swam now, when he looked down between his dangling
toes and saw the dark lands opening wide underneath him, touched here and there with the light of
the moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in the plains.

The pale peaks of the mountains were coming nearer, moonlit spikes of rock sticking out of
black shadows.

Very soon Bilbo was laid down, trembling with fear, on a wide shelf
of rock on the mountain-side.

There he found all the others sitting with their backs to the
mountain wall.

As a matter of fact
Gandalf, who had often been in the mountains, had once rendered a service to the eagles and healed
their lord from an arrow-wound.

As Bilbo listened to the talk of Gandalf he realized that
at last they were going to escape really and truly from the dreadful mountains.

So ended the adventures of the Misty Mountains.

The dwarves were crying farewells and promising to repay the lord of the eagles if ever they
could, as off rose fifteen great birds from the mountain’s side.

The morning was cool, and mists were in the valleys and hollows and twined here
and there about the peaks and pinnacles of the hills.

Bilbo opened an eye to peep and saw that the
birds were already high up and the world was far away, and the mountains were falling back behind
them into the distance.

The earth was much nearer, and below them
were trees that looked like oaks and elms, and wide grass lands, and a river running through it all.

But cropping out of the ground, right in the path of the stream which looped itself about it, was a
great rock, almost a hill of stone, like a last outpost of the distant mountains, or a huge piece cast
miles into the plain by some giant among giants.

There was a flat space on the top of
the hill of stone and a well worn path with many steps leading down it to the river, across which a
ford of huge flat stones led to the grass-land beyond the stream.

There was a little cave (a
wholesome one with a pebbly floor) at the foot of the steps and near the end of the stony ford.

“I always meant to see you all safe (if possible) over the mountains,” said the wizard, “and
now by good management and good luck I have done it.

You are
still some miles north of the path which we should have been following, if we had not left the

mountain pass in a hurry.

Then they took off their clothes and bathed in the river,
which was shallow and clear and stony at the ford.

Some say that he is a bear descended from the great and ancient
bears of the mountains that lived there before the giants came.

Others say that he is a man
descended from the first men who lived before Smaug or the other dragons came into this part of
the world, and before the goblins came into the hills out of the North.

I once saw him sitting all alone on the top of the Carrock at night watching the
moon sinking towards the Misty Mountains, and I heard him growl in the tongue of bears; ‘The day
will come when they will perish and I shall go back!’

That is why I believe he once came from the
mountains himself.”
Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think about, and they asked no more questions.

I may say we have had rather a bad time with goblins in the mountains.”
“Goblins?” said the big man less gruffly.

“I was coming over the mountains with a friend or two...” said the wizard.

“There was a terrible storm;
the stone-giants were out hurling rocks, and at the head of the pass we took refuge in a cave, the hob
bit

“As soon as we were asleep,” went on Gandalf, “a
crack at the back of the cave opened; goblins came out and grabbed the hobbit and the dwarves and
our troop of ponies-“ “Troop of ponies?

You see, in the old days he had known the very part of
the mountains that Gandalf was describing.

There
we were with the wolves going mad underneath us and the forest beginning to blaze in places, when
the goblins came down from the hills and discovered us.

By the time the wizard had finished his tale and had told of the eagles’ rescue and of how they
had all been brought to the Carrock, the sun had fallen behind the peaks of the Misty Mountains and
the shadows were long in Beorn’s garden.

All the time they ate, Beorn in his deep
rolling voice told tales of the wild lands on this side of the mountains, and especially of the dark and
dangerous wood, that lay outstretched far to North and South a day’s ride before them, barring their
way to the East, the terrible forest of Mirkwood.

The dwarves listened and shook their beards, for they knew that they must soon venture into
that forest and that after the mountains it was the worst of the perils they had to pass before they
came to the dragon’s stronghold.

The fires in the middle of the hall were built with fresh logs and the torches
were put out, and still they sat in the light of the dancing flames with the pillars of the house
standing tall behind them, arid dark at the top like trees of the forest.

Some of the verses were
like this, but there were many more, and their singing went on for a long while:
“The wind was on the withered heath,
but in the forest stirred no leaf:
there shadows lay by night and day,
and dark things silent crept beneath.

The wind came down from mountains cold,
and like a tide it roared and rolled;
the branches groaned, the forest moaned,
and leaves were laid upon the mould.

The wind went on from West to East ;
all movement in the forest ceased,
but shrill and harsh across the marsh

its whistling voices were released.

It passed the lonely Mountain bare
and swept above the dragon’s lair :

They came from almost
every direction, except from the west over the river, from the Mountains.

There they disappeared into the river, but the water was
too deep and strong beyond the rock for me to cross.

I had to walk miles before I found a place where the river was wide and shallow enough
for me to wade and swim, and then miles back again to pick up the tracks again.

They went straight off in the direction of the pine-woods on the
east side of the Misty Mountains, where we had our pleasant little party with the Wargs the night
before last.

He
had been over the river and right back up into the mountains-from which you can guess that he
could travel quickly, in bear’s shape at any rate.

So much they told him when he forced them, but he guessed there was more
wickedness than this afoot, and that a great raid of the whole goblin army with their wolf-allies into
the lands shadowed by the mountains might soon be made to find the dwarves, or to take vengeance
on the men and creatures that lived there, and who they thought must be sheltering them.

He would provide ponies for each of them, and a
horse for Gandalf, for their journey to the forest, and he would lade them with food to last them for

weeks with care, and packed so as to be as easy as possible to carry-nuts, flour, sealed jars of dried
fruits, and red earthenware pots of honey, and twice-baked cakes that would keep good a long time,
and on a little of which they could march far.

Water, he said, they would not need to carry this side of the forest, for there were streams and
springs along the road.

Beyond the edge of
the forest I cannot help you much; you must depend on your luck and your courage and the food I
send with you.

At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back my horse and my ponies.

By his advice they were no
longer making for the main forest-road to the south of his land.

Had they
followed the pass, their path would have led them down the stream from the mountains that
joined the great river miles south of the Carrock.

At that point there was a deep ford which they
might have passed, if they had still had their ponies, and beyond that a track led to the skirts of the
wood and to the entrance of the old forest road.

But Beorn had warned them that that way was now
often used by the goblins, while the forest-road itself, he bad heard, was overgrown and disused at
the eastern end and led to impassable marshes where the paths had long been lost.

Its eastern
opening had also always been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain, and would have left them
still with a long and difficult northward march when they got to the other side.

North of the Carrock
the edge of Mirkwood drew closer to the borders of the Great River, and though here the Mountains
too drew down nearer, Beorn advised them to take this way; for at a place a few days’ ride due north
of the Carrock was the gate of a little-known pathway through Mirkwood that led almost straight
towards the Lonely Mountain.

“The goblins,” Beorn had said, “will not dare to cross the Great River for a hundred miles
north of the Carrock nor to come near my house – it is well protected at night!–

but I should ride
fast; for if they make their raid soon they will cross the river to the south and scour all the edge of
the forest so as to cut you off, and Wargs run swifter than ponies.

That is
why they were now riding in silence, galloping wherever the ground was grassy and smooth, with
the mountains dark on their left, and in the distance the line of the river with its trees drawing ever
closer.

It was difficult to think of pursuing goblins behind, and when they had put many
miles between them and Beorn’s house they began to talk and to sing again and to forget the dark
forest-path that lay in front.

But in the evening when the dusk came on and the peaks of the

mountains glowered against the sunset they made a camp and set a guard, and most of them slept
uneasily with dreams in which there came the howl of hunting wolves and the cries of goblins.

There was an autumn-like mist white upon the
ground and the air was chill, but soon the sun rose red in the East and the mists vanished, and while
the shadows were still long they were off again.

That third evening they were so eager to press on, for Beorn had said that they should reach the
forest-gate early on the fourth day, that they rode still forward after dusk and into the night beneath
the moon.

As soon as it was light they could see the forest coming as it were to meet them, or
waiting for them like a black and frowning wall before them.

“The
greatest of the forests of the Northern world.

You do not guess what kindness he has shown you in letting dwarves ride
them so far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if you tried to take them into the forest.”

Think of the treasure at the end, and forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate
until tomorrow morning!”

So now there was nothing left to do but
to fill their water-skins at a clear spring they found close to the forest-gate, and unpack the ponies.

He had gone just inside the forest after
breakfast (a very poor one), and it had seemed as dark in there in the morning as at night, and very
secret: “a sort of watching and waiting feeling,” he said to himself.

Straight through
the forest is your way now.

Before you could get round Mirkwood in the North you would be right among the slopes of the
Grey Mountains, and they are simply stiff with goblins, hobgoblins, and rest of the worst
description.

Stick to the forest-track,
keep your spirits up, hope for the best, and with a tremendous slice of luck you may come out one
day and see the Long Marshes lying below you, and beyond them, high in the East, the Lonely
Mountain where dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not expecting you.”
“Very comforting you are to be sure,” growled Thorin.

They each shouldered the heavy pack and the water-skin which was their share, and turned
from the light that lay on the lands outside and plunged into the forest.

There were queer noises too, grunts, scufflings, and hurryings in the

undergrowth, and among the leaves that lay piled endlessly thick in places on the forest-floor; but
what made the noises he could not see.

It was not long before they grew to hate the forest as heartily as they had hated the tunnels of
the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending.

There was no movement of air down under the forest-roof, and it was everlastingly still and
dark and stuffy.

Even so, as
days followed days, and still the forest seemed just the same, they began to get anxious.

They had crossed the enchanted stream; but beyond it the path seemed to straggle
on just as before, and in the forest they could see no change.

Their feet ruffled among the dead leaves of countless other autumns that drifted over the
banks of the path from the deep red carpets of the forest.

“Is there no end to
this accursed forest?” said Thorin.

Actually, as I have told you, they were not far off the edge of the forest; and if Bilbo had had
the sense to see it, the tree that he had climbed, though it was tall in itself, was standing near the
bottom of a wide valley, so that from its top the trees seemed to swell up all round like the edges of
a great bowl, and he could not expect to see how far the forest lasted.

“The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all directions!

That night they ate their very last scraps and crumbs of food; and next morning when they
woke the first thing they noticed was that they were still gnawingly hungry, and the next thing was
that it was raining and that here and there the drip of it was dropping heavily on the forest floor.

I
dreamed I was walking in a forest rather like this one, only lit with torches on the trees and lamps
swinging from the branches and fires burning on the ground; and there was a great feast going on,
going on for ever.

If you hadn’t waked up, we should have
left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest; you are no joke to carry even after weeks of short
commons.”

I thought
I saw a twinkle of light in the forest.”

In the end, in spite of warnings, hunger
decided them, because Bombur kept on describing all the good things that were being eaten,
according to his dream, in the woodland feast; so they all left the path and plunged into the forest
together.

After blundering frantically in the gloom, falling over logs, bumping crash into
trees, and shouting and calling till they must have waked everything in the forest for miles, at last
they managed to gather themselves in a bundle and count themselves by touch.

But that was not the last of the lights in the forest.

There was the usual dim grey light of the forest-day about him when he came to his senses.

The forest was grim and silent, but obviously he had first of all to look for his friends, who
were not likely to be very far off, unless they had been made prisoners by the elves (or worse
things).

He had picked his way stealthily ‘for some distance, when he noticed a place of dense black
shadow ahead of him black even for that forest, like a patch of midnight that had never been cleared
away.

They followed him into
the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as he dared.

They wondered what evil fate had befallen him, magic or dark
monsters; and shuddered as they lay lost in the forest.

For most of them (together with their scattered relations in the hills and mountains) were descended
from the ancient tribes that never went to Faerie in the West.

In the Wide World the Wood-elves lingered in the
twilight of our Sun and Moon but loved best the stars; and they wandered in the great forests that
grew tall in lands that are now lost.

In a great cave some miles within the edge of Mirkwood on its eastern side there lived at this
time their greatest king.

Before his huge doors of stone a river ran out of the heights of the forest
and flowed on and out into the marshes at the feet of the high wooded lands.

This great cave, from
which countless smaller ones opened out on every side, wound far underground and had many
passages and wide halls; but it was lighter and more wholesome than any goblin-dwelling, and
neither so deep nor so dangerous.

The king’s cave was his palace, and the strong place of his treasure, and the fortress
of his people against their enemies.

So to the cave they dragged Thorin-not too gently,
for they did not love dwarves, and thought he was an enemy.

“Where are your friends now, and what are they doing?”
“I don’t know, but I expect starving in the forest.”

“What were you doing in the forest?”
“Looking for food and drink, because we were starving.”

“But what brought you into the forest at all?” asked the king angrily.

Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut him in one of the inmost caves with
strong wooden doors, and left him.

Such day as there ever was in the forest was fading once
more into the blackness of night, when suddenly out sprang the light of many torches all round
them, like hundreds of red stars.

Nor did they hear or feel him trotting along
well behind their torch-light as they led off their prisoners into the forest.

This was the bridge that led across the river to the king’s doors.

The water flowed dark and swift
and strong beneath; and at the far end were gates before the mouth of a huge cave that ran into the
side of a steep slope covered with trees.

He did not at all like the look of the cavern-mouth and he only made up his mind not to
desert his friends just in time to scuttle over at the heels of the fast elves, before the great gates of
the king closed behind them with a clang.

“Is it a crime to be lost in
the forest, to be hungry and thirsty, to be trapped by spiders?

Did you not three times pursue and
trouble my people in the forest and ‘ rouse the spiders with your riot and clamour?

He could not keep up with the hunting elves all the time
they were out, so he never discovered the ways out of the wood, and was left to wander miserably
in the forest, terrified of losing himself, until a chance came of returning.

He was hungry too
outside, for he was no hunter; but inside the caves he could pick up a living of some sort by stealing
food from store or table when no one was at hand.

Bilbo discovered a very interesting thing: the great gates were not the only
entrance to the caves.

A stream flowed under part of the lowest regions of the palace, and joined the
Forest River some way further to the east, beyond the steep slope out of which the main mouth
opened.

Where this underground watercourse came forth from the hillside there was a water-gate.

There the rocky roof came down close to the surface of the stream, and from it a portcullis could be
dropped right to the bed of the river to prevent anyone coming in or out that way.

If anyone had come in
that way, he would have found himself in a dark rough tunnel leading deep into the heart of the hill;
but at one point where it passed under the caves the roof had been cut away and covered with great
oaken trapdoors.

Hiding behind one of the largest barrels Bilbo discovered the trapdoors and their use, and
lurking there, listening to the talk of the king’s servants, he learned how the wine and other goods
came up the rivers, or over land, to the Long Lake.

It seemed a town of Men still throve there, built
out on bridges far into the water as a protection against enemies of all sorts, and especially against
the dragon of the Mountain.

From Lake-town the barrels were brought up the Forest River.

When the barrels were empty the elves cast them through the trapdoors, opened the
water-gate, and out the barrels floated on the stream, bobbing along, until they were carried by the
current to a place far down the river where the bank jutted out, near to the very eastern edge of
Mirkwood.

There they were collected and tied together and floated back to Lake-town, which stood

close to the point where the Forest River flowed into the Long Lake.

“On your head be it,
if the king’s full buttertubs and his best wine is pushed into the river for the Lake-men to feast on
for nothing!”
“Roll-roll-roll-roll,
roll-roll-rolling down the hole I

Heave ho!

It looked as if he would certainly lose his
friends this time (nearly all of them had already disappeared through the dark trap-door), and get
utterly left behind and have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar in the elf-caves for ever.

While all these thoughts were passing through his mind, the elves being very merry began to
sing a song round the river-door.

Leave the halls and caverns deep,
Leave the northern mountains steep,
Where the forest wide and dim
Stoops in shadow grey and grim!

Back to gardens on the hills
Where the berry swells and fills
Under sunlight, under day!

The dark river
opened suddenly wide, and there it was joined to the main water of the Forest River flowing down
in haste from the king’s great doors.

Then the
hurrying water of the Forest River swept all the company of casks and tubs away to the north bank,
in which it had eaten out a wide bay.

Very soon there was a fine commotion in the village by the riverside; but Bilbo escaped
into the woods carrying a loaf and a leather bottle of wine and a pie that did not belong to him.

The

rest of the night he had to pass wet as he was and far from a fire, but the bottle helped him to do
that, and he actually dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though the year was getting late and the
air was chilly.

It was already grey morning, and there was a
merry racket down by the river.

They were making up a raft of barrels, and the raft-elves would
soon be steering it off down the stream to Lake-town.

After a while the river rounded a steep
shoulder of land that came down upon their left.

Then Bilbo saw a sight: The lands opened wide about him, filled with the waters of the river
which broke up and wandered in a hundred winding courses, or halted in marshes and pools dotted
with isles on every side: but still a strong water flowed on steadily through the midst.

And far away,
its dark head in a torn cloud, there loomed the Mountain!

All alone it rose and looked across the
marshes to the forest.

The Lonely Mountain!

The talk was all of the
trade that came and went on the waterways and the growth of the traffic on the river, as the roads
out of the East towards Mirkwood vanished or fell into disuse; and of the bickerings of the
Lake-men and the Wood-elves about the upkeep of the Forest River and the care of the banks.

Those lands had changed much since the days when dwarves dwelt in the Mountain, days
which most people now remembered only as a very shadowy tradition.

Great floods and rains had
swollen the waters that flowed east; and there had been an earthquake or two (which some were
inclined to attribute to the dragon-alluding to him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod in the
direction of the Mountain).

The
elf-road through the wood which the dwarves had followed on the advice of Beorn now came to a
doubtful and little used end at the eastern edge of the forest; only the river offered any longer a safe
way from the skirts of Mirkwood in the North to the mountain-shadowed plains beyond, and the
river was guarded by the Wood-elves’ king.

All he knew was that the river seemed to go on and on and on for ever, and he was hungry,
and had a nasty cold in the nose, and did not like the way the Mountain seemed to frown at him and
threaten him as it drew ever nearer.

After a while, however, the river took a more southerly course
and the Mountain receded again, and at last, late in the day the shores grew rocky, the river gathered
all its wandering waters together into a deep and rapid flood, and they swept along at great speed.

The sun had set when turning with another sweep towards the East the forest-river rushed into
the Long Lake.

It was so wide that the opposite shores looked small and far, but it was so long
that its northerly end, which pointed towards the Mountain, could not be seen at all.

Only from the
map did Bilbo know that away up there, where the stars of the Wain were already twinkling, the
Running River came down into the lake from Dale and with the Forest River filled with deep waters
what must once have been a great deep rocky valley.

Not far from the mouth of the Forest River was the strange town he heard the elves speak of
in the king’s cellars.

It was not built on the shore, though there were a few huts and buildings there,
but right out on the surface of the lake, protected from the swirl of the entering river by a
promontory of rock which formed a calm bay.

bridge made of wood ran out to where on
huge piles made of forest trees was built a busy wooden town, not a town of elves but of Men, who
still dared to dwell here under the shadow of the distant dragon-mountain.

They still throve on the
trade that came up the great river from the South and was carted past the falls to their town; but in
the great days of old, when Dale in the North was rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and
powerful, and there had been fleets of boats on the waters, and some were filled with gold and some
with warriors in armour, and there had been wars and deeds which were now only a legend.

The
rotting piles of a greater town could still be seen along the shores when the waters sank in a
drought.

But men remembered little of all that, though some still sang old songs of the dwarf-kings of
the Mountain, Thror and Thrain of the race of Durin, and of the coming of the Dragon, and the fall
of the lords of Dale.

Some sang too that Thror and Thrain would come back one day and gold
would flow in rivers through the mountain-gates, and all that land would be filled with new song
and new laughter.

As soon as the raft of barrels came in sight boats rowed out from the piles of the town, and
voices hailed the raft-steerers.

Then ropes were cast and oars were pulled, and soon the raft was
drawn out of the current of the Forest River and towed away round the high shoulder of rock into
the little bay of Lake-town.

In
the meanwhile the barrels were left afloat while the elves of the raft and the boatmen went to feast
in Lake-town.

In the meanwhile what next?” “I suggest
Lake-town,” said Bilbo, “What else is there?”

Except for occasional squabbles about river-tolls they were
friends with the Wood-elves.

Other folk were far away; and some of the younger people in the town
openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the mountain, and laughed at the greybeards and
gammers who said that they had seen him flying in the sky in their young days.

“Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain!” said the dwarf in a loud voice,
and he looked it, in spite of his torn clothes and draggled hood.

I wish to see the Master of your town!”

Some of the more foolish ran out of the hut as if they
expected the Mountain to go golden in the night and all the waters of the lake to turn yellow right
away.

Now
make haste and let us have no more words, or your master may have something to say to you.”
“Follow me then,” said the captain, and with six men about them he led them over the bridge
through the gates and into the market-place of the town.

“I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the
Mountain!

The Master of the town sprang from his great chair.

As a matter of fact he thought it far more likely than the
return of the King under the Mountain, if any such person had ever existed.

Nor is this town in the Wood-elves’ realm.

I speak to the Master of the
town of the Men of the lake, not to the raft-men of the king.”

The news had
spread from the doors of the hall like fire through all the town.

Some began to sing snatches of old
songs concerning the return of the King under the Mountain; that it was Thror’s grandson not Thror
himself that had come back did not bother them at all.

“The King beneath the mountains,
The King of carven stone,
The lord of silver fountains
Shall come into his own!

The woods shall wave on mountains
And grass beneath the sun;
His wealth shall flow in fountains
And the rivers golden run.

The streams shall run in gladness,
The lakes shall shine and burn,
And sorrow fail and sadness
At the Mountain-king’s return!”

Indeed such excitement had
not been known in the town in the memory of the oldest grandfather.

Soon afterwards the other dwarves were brought into the town amid scenes of astonishing
enthusiasm.

Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them were quite new and spoke confidently of
the sudden death of the dragon and of cargoes of rich presents coming down the river to Lake-town.

He had not forgotten the look of the Mountain, nor the thought of the dragon, and he had
besides a shocking cold.

In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up the Forest River with their cargoes, and
there was great excitement in the king’s palace.

Nothing of course was ever said about keys or barrels while the dwarves
stayed in Lake-town, and Bilbo was careful never to become invisible.

He at any rate did not believe in dwarves fighting and killing dragons like Smaug, and he strongly
suspected attempted burglary or something like it which shows he was a wise elf and wiser than the
men of the town, though not quite right, as we shall see in the end.

He sent out his spies about the
shores of the lake and as far northward towards the Mountains as they would go, and waited.

While the enthusiasm still lasted in the town
was the time to get help.

So he spoke to the
Master and his councillors and said that soon he and his company must go on towards the
Mountain.

Thorin, of course, was really the grandson of the King
under the Mountain, and there is no knowing what a dwarf will not dare and do for revenge or the
recovery of his own.

So one day, although autumn was now getting far on, and winds were cold,
and leaves were falling fast, three large boats left Lake-town, laden with rowers, dwarves, Mr.
Baggins, and many provisions.

The Master and his councillors bade them farewell from the
great steps of the town-hall that went down to the lake.

In two days going they rowed right up the Long Lake and passed out into the River Running,
and now they could all see the Lonely Mountain towering grim and tall before them.

At the; end of the third day, some miles up the river, they drew in
to the left or western bank and disembarked.

They
packed what they could on the ponies and the rest was made into a store under a tent, but none of
the men of the town would stay with them even for the night so near the shadow of the Mountain.

So their escort left them, making off swiftly down the river
and the shoreward paths, although the night was already drawing on.

They made north-west, slanting away from the River Running, and
drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur of the Mountain that was flung out southwards
towards them.

They reached the skirts of the Mountain all the same without meeting any danger or any sign
of the Dragon other than the wilderness he had made about his lair.

The Mountain lay dark and
silent before them and ever higher above them.

They made their first camp on the western side of
the great southern spur, which ended in a height called Ravenhill.

Before setting out to search the
western spurs of the Mountain for the hidden door, on which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a
scouting expedition to spy out the land to the South where the Front Gate stood.

They marched under the grey and silent
cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill.

There the river, after winding a wide loop over the valley of Dale,
turned from the Mountain on its road to the Lake, flowing swift and noisily.

Its bank was bare and
rocky, tall and steep above the stream; and gazing out from it over the narrow water, foaming and
splashing among many boulders, they could see in the wide valley shadowed by the Mountain’s
arms the grey ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls.

“The mountain’s sides were green with woods
and all the sheltered valley rich and pleasant in the days when the bells rang in that town.”

They did not dare to follow the river much further to.

wards the Gate; but they went
on beyond the end of the southern spur, until lying hidden behind a rock they could look out and see
the dark cavernous opening in a great cliff-wall between the arms of the Mountain.

Out of it the
waters of the Running River sprang; and out of it too there came a steam and a dark smoke.

And I don’t like these
dark birds, they look like spies of evil.”
“The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the Mountain then-or I imagine so from the
smoke,” said the hobbit.

But he might be
gone away some time, or he might be lying out on the mountain-side keeping watch, and still I
expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: all the halls within must be filled with his
foul reek.”

They moved their camp then to a long valley, narrower than the great dale in the South where the
Gates of the river stood, and walled with lower spurs of the Mountain.

From this western camp, shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the
sun began to sink towards the forest, day by day they toiled in parties searching for paths up the
mountain-side.

Following these excitedly he and the dwarves found traces of a narrow
track, often lost, often rediscovered, that wandered on to the top of the southern ridge and brought
them at last to a still narrower ledge, which turned north across the face of the Mountain.

It was not a cave and was open to the sky above; but at its inner end a flat wall rose up
that in the lower I part, close to the ground, was as smooth and upright as mason’s work, but
without a joint or crevice to be seen.

Only Bofur and Bombur were left behind to guard the ponies and such stores as they had
brought with them from the river.

In the meanwhile some of them explored the ledge beyond the opening and found a path that
led higher and higher on to the mountain; but they did not dare to venture very far that way, nor was
there much use in it.

They had brought picks
and tools of many sorts from Lake-town, and at first they tried to use these.

He would do nothing but sit with his back to the rock-face and stare away west
through the opening, over the cliff, over the wide lands to the black wall of Mirkwood, and to the
distances beyond, in which he sometimes thought he could catch glimpses of the Misty Mountains
small and far.

But I am afraid he was not thinking much of the job, but of what lay
beyond the blue distance, the quiet Western Land and the Hill and his hobbit-hole under it.

Next day the dwarves all went wandering
off in various directions; some were exercising the ponies down below, some were roving about the
mountain-side.

If he lifted his head he could see a glimpse of the
distant forest.

It seemed as if darkness flowed out like a vapour
from the hole in the mountain-side, and deep darkness in which nothing could be seen lay before
their eyes mouth leading in and down.

The stars were coming out behind him in a pale sky barred with black when the hobbit crept
through the enchanted door and stole into the Mountain.

This was no goblin entrance, or rough wood-elves’ cave.

Before
him lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the Mountain’s
root.

The dwarves were still passing the cup from hand to hand and talking delightedly of the
recovery of their treasure, when suddenly a vast rumbling woke in the mountain underneath as if it
was an old volcano that had made up its mind to start eruptions once again.

There was a breath of strange air in his cave.

Such a thing had not happened since first he came to the Mountain!

His fire belched forth, the hall smoked, he shook the mountain-roots.

He thrust his head in
vain at the little hole, and then coiling his length together, roaring like thunder underground, he sped
from his deep lair through its great door, out into the huge passages of the mountain-palace and up
towards the Front Gate.

To hunt the whole mountain till he had caught the thief and had torn and
trampled him was his one thought.

He issued from the Gate, the waters rose in fierce whistling
steam, and up he soared blazing into the air and settled on the mountain-top in a spout of green and
scarlet flame.

They had barely time to fly back to the tunnel, pulling and
dragging in their bundles, when Smaug came hurtling from the North, licking the mountain-sides
with flame, beating his great wings with a noise like a roaring wind.

Here we are and here we shall have to stay,
unless any one fancies tramping the long open miles back to the river with Smaug on the watch!”

Every
now and again through the night they could hear the roar of the flying dragon grow and then pass
and fade, as he hunted round and round the mountain-sides.

He guessed from the ponies, and from the traces of the camps he had discovered, that men had
come up from the river and the lake and had scaled the mountain-side from the valley where the
ponies had been standing; but the door withstood his searching eye, and the little high-walled bay
had kept out his fiercest flames.

Long he had hunted in vain till the dawn chilled his wrath and he
went back to his golden couch to sleep – and to gather new strength.

Perhaps before long one or two could be chosen to go back to the
store by the river and replenish our supplies.

When midday came he got ready for another journey down into the Mountain.

I come from under the hill, and under hills and over the hills my paths led.

Not much use on the mountain -side?

Not
much use in the forest?

He had a wicked and a
wily heart, and he knew his guesses were not far out, though he suspected that the Lake-men were
at the back of the plans, and that most of the plunder was meant to stop there in the town by the
shore that in his young days had been called Esgaroth.

So far all his. thoughts
and energies had been concentrated on getting to the Mountain and finding the entrance.

He had
never bothered to wonder how the treasure was to be removed, certainly never how any part of it
that might fall to his share was to be brought back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill.

We came over hill and under hill, by wave and win, for
“Revenge”.

The King under the Mountain is dead and where are hi kin that dare
seek revenge?

“Well, he’ll have news to take to Lake-town all right, if that is what he is
after,” said Bilbo; “though I don’t suppose there are any people left there that trouble with
thrush-language.”

“I am sure he
knows we came from Lake-town and had help from there; and I have a horrible feeling that his next
move may be in that direction.

He will break all this side of the Mountain to bits, if necessary, to stop up
our entrance, and if we are smashed with it the better he will like it.”

But fairest of all was the great white gem, which the dwarves had found
beneath the roots of the Mountain, the Heart of the Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain.

They were shut in the Mountain!

They had hardly gone any distance down the tunnel when a blow
smote the side of the Mountain like the crash of battering-rams made of forest oaks and swung by
giants.

Smaug had left his lair in
silent stealth, quietly soared into the air, and then floated heavy and slow in the dark like a
monstrous crow, down the wind towards the west of the Mountain, in the hopes of catching
unawares something or somebody there, and of spying the outlet to the passage which the thief had
used.

They shall see me and remember who is the real King under the
Mountain!”

He rose in fire and went away south towards the Running River.

It was the Arkenstone, the Heart of the Mountain.

The great jewel shone before he
feet of its own inner light, and yet, cut and fashioned by the dwarves, who had dug it from the heart
of the mountain long ago, it took all light that fell upon it and-changes it into ten thousand sparks of
white radiance shot with glints of the rainbow.

How they would laugh on
the Hill at home

“There is the
birth of the Running River,” said Thorin.

A misty sun sent its pale light between the arms of the Mountain, and beams of gold

fell on the pavement at the threshold.

It swirled over and
round the arms of the Mountain into the valley, and sighed among the rocks.

After their long time in
the stewing depths of the dragon-haunted caverns, they shivered in the sun.

“And I think I know which way we should go: we ought to
make for the old look-out post at the Southwest corner of the Mountain.”

The river loops suddenly east
across Dale in front of the ruined town.

At that point there was once a bridge, leading to steep stairs
that climbed up the right bank, and so to a road running towards Ravenhill.

I hope he is not up on the Mountain looking down at
us!”

Under the rocky wall to the right there was no path, so on they trudged among
the stones on the left side of the river, and the emptiness and desolation soon sobered even Thorin
again.

After that they went on again; and now the road struck westwards and left the river, and the
great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-spur drew ever nearer.

At length they reached the hill
path.

There were
several places like it round the Mountain.

“Not much use, if we have been seen coming here,” said Dori, who was always looking up
towards the Mountain’s peak, as if he expected to see Smaug perched there like a bird on a steeple.

The men of the lake-town Esgaroth were mostly indoors, for the breeze was from the black
East and chill, but a few were walking on the quays, and watching, as they were fond of doing, the
stars shine out from the smooth patches of the lake as they opened in the sky.

From their town the
Lonely Mountain was mostly screened by the low hills at the far end of the lake, through a gap in
which the Running River came down from the North.

“Perhaps the King under the Mountain is forging gold,” said another.

“As like as not it is the marauding fire of the
Dragon, the only king under the Mountain we have ever known.”
“You are always foreboding gloomy things!” said the others.

Then suddenly a great light appeared in the low place
in the hills and the northern end of the lake turned golden.

“The King beneath the Mountain!”

“His wealth is like the Sun, his silver like a
fountain, his rivers golden run!

The river is running gold from the Mountain!”

Every vessel in the town was filled
with water, every warrior was armed, every arrow and dart was ready, and the bridge to the land
was thrown down and destroyed, before the roar of Smaug’s terrible approach grew loud, and the
lake rippled red as fire beneath the awful beating of his wings.

Roaring he swept back over the town.

Then down he swooped straight through the arrow-storm, reckless in his rage,
taking no heed to turn his scaly sides towards his foes, seeking only to set their town ablaze.

Soon all the town would be deserted and burned down to the surface of
the lake.

Just now he was enjoying the sport of town-baiting more than he had enjoyed anything for
years.

He was a
descendant in long line of Girion, Lord of Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down the
Running River from the ruin long ago.

And while Bard paused in wonder it told him of tidings up in the
Mountain and of all that it had heard.

If ever you came
from the forges of the true king under the Mountain, go now and speed well!”

Full on the town he fell.

Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark on the surface of the lake, and
down the wind came the voices of the people of Esgaroth lamenting their lost town and goods and
ruined houses.

But they had really much to be thankful for, had they thought of it, though it could
hardly be expected that they should just then: three quarters of the people of the town had at least
escaped alive; their woods and fields and pastures and cattle and most of their boats remained
undamaged; and the dragon was dead.

They gathered in
mournful crowds upon the western shores, shivering in the cold wind, and their first complaints and
anger were against the Master, who had left the town so soon, while some were still willing to
defend it.

“In the Lake-town we have always
elected masters from among the old and wise, and have not endured the rule of mere fighting men.

And any that wish can go with him, if they prefer the cold shores under the shadow of the
Mountain to the green shores of the lake.

The wise will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and
enjoy again in time its peace and riches.”

“He has tonight earned an eminent place in the roll of the benefactors of
our town; and he is worthy of many imperishable songs.

What sort of gold have they sent down the river to reward us?

Then even as he was speaking, the thought came into his heart of the fabled treasure of the
Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell suddenly silent.

Many took ill of wet and cold and sorrow that night, and afterwards died, who had escaped
uninjured from the ruin of the town; and in the days that followed there was much sickness and
great hunger.

But help came swiftly; for Bard at once had speedy
messengers sent up the river to the Forest to ask the aid of the King of the Elves of the Wood, and
these messengers had found a host already on the move, although it was then only the third day
after the fall of Smaug.

Above the borders of the Forest there was whistling, crying and piping.

Even before the
Elvenking rode forth the news had passed west right to the pinewoods of the Misty Mountains;
Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the goblins were at council in their caves.

But the king, when he received the prayers of Bard, had pity, for he was
the lord of a good and kindly people; so turning his march, which had at first been direct towards
the Mountain, he hastened now down the river to the Long Lake.

Still elves are light-footed, and though they were not in these days much used to the
marches and the treacherous lands between the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift.

Only five
days after the death of the dragon they came upon the shores and looked on the ruins of the town.

With the women and the children, the old and the unfit, the
Master remained behind; and with him were some men of crafts and many skilled elves; and they
busied themselves felling trees, and collecting the timber sent down from the Forest.

Then they set
about raising many huts by the shore against the oncoming winter; and also under the Master’s
direction they began the planning of a new town, designed more fair and large even than before, but
not in the same place.

There for ages his huge bones could be seen in
calm weather amid the ruined piles of the old town.

But all the men of arms who were still able, and the most of the Elvenking’s array, got
ready to march north to the Mountain.

It was thus that in eleven days from the ruin of the town the
head of their host passed the rock-gates at the end of the lake and came into the desolate lands.

Their companies came flying from the South; and the crows that still lived about the
Mountain were wheeling and crying unceasingly above.

“He seems to have
escaped, when Smaug smashed the mountain-side, but I don’t suppose the snails have!”

This very height was once named
Ravenhill, because there was a wise and famous pair, old Care and his wife, that lived here above
the guard-chamber.

Now I am the chief of the great ravens of the
Mountain.

the birds are gathering back again to the Mountain and to Dale from

South and East and West, for word has gone out that Smaug is dead!”

By the lake men
murmur that their sorrows are due to the dwarves; for they are homeless and many have died, and
Smaug has destroyed their town.

Also I would beg of you,
if any of you are still young and strong of wing, that you would send messengers to our kin in the
mountains of the North, both west from here and east, and tell them of our plight.

But go specially
to my cousin Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well-armed, and dwells nearest to this
place.

“Back now to the Mountain!” cried Thorin.

“Back to the Mountain!” cried the dwarves as if they had not heard him, so back he
had to go with them.

They explored the caverns once more, and found, as they expected,
that only the Front Gate remained open; all the other gates (except, of course, the small secret door)
had long ago been broken and blocked by Smaug, and no sign of them remained.

Better still, they heard
that three of their ponies had escaped and were wandering wild far down the banks of the Running
River, not far from where the rest of their stores had been left.

They were four days gone, and by that time they knew that the joined armies of the Lake-men
and the Elves were hurrying towards the Mountain.

For the issuing of the stream they had contrived a small low arch under the new wall; but near the
entrance they had so altered the narrow bed that a wide pool stretched from the mountain-wall to
the head of the fall over which the stream went towards Dale.

They must have come into the
valley under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river.”

As they stood pointing and speaking to one another Thorin hailed them:
“Who are you,” he called in a very loud voice, “that come as if in war to the gates of Thorin
son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do you desire?”

That day the camp was moved and was brought
right between the arms of the Mountain.

There was the sound, too, of elven-harps and of sweet music; and as it
echoed up towards them it seemed that the chill of the air was warmed, and they caught faintly the
fragrance of woodland flowers blossoming in spring.

“Under the Mountain dark and tall
The King has come unto his hall!

The mountain throne once more is freed!

Now call we over mountains cold,
‘Come hack unto the caverns old’!

The king is come unto his hall
Under the Mountain dark and tall.

This song appeared to please Thorin, and he smiled again and grew merry; and he began
reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how long it would be before Dain could reach the
Lonely Mountain, if he had set out as soon as the message reached him.

The next morning early a company of
spearmen was seen crossing the river, and marching up the valley.

Again Thorin hailed them in a loud voice: “Who are you that come
armed for war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain?”

Moreover I am by right descent the heir of Girion of Dale, and in your
hoard is mingled much of the wealth of his halls and town, which of old Smaug stole.

“In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,” one cried, “we speak unto Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, calling himself the King under the Mountain, and we bid him consider well the claims
that have been urged, or be declared our foe.

‘”Since such is your answer,” he called in return, “I declare the Mountain besieged.

He had by now had more
than enough of the Mountain, and being besieged inside it was not at all to his taste.

“For the Arkenstone of my father,” he said, “is worth more than a river of
gold in itself, and to me it is beyond price.

Things had gone on like this for some time, when the ravens brought news that
Dain and more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from the Iron Hills, were now within about two
days’ march of Dale, coming from the North-East.

“But they cannot reach the Mountain unmarked,”
said Rac, “and I fear lest there be battle in the valley.

Bombur would sleep (he could
sleep at any time, and ever since the adventure in the forest he was always trying to recapture the
beautiful dreams he had then); and all the others were busy with Thorin.

You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?”
“We have, a long time ago; but what has he got to do with us?” asked the king.

“This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,” said Bilbo, “the Heart of the Mountain; and it is also the
heart of Thorin.

He values it above a river of gold.

About midday the banners of the Forest and the Lake were seen to
be borne forth again.

“You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain,” said Gandalf.

If
that is done without deceit, then we will depart, and the elf-host will go back to the Forest.

Runners came in to report that a host of dwarves had
appeared round the eastern spur of the Mountain and was now hastening to Dale.

They halted between the river and the eastern spur; but a few held on
their way, and crossing the river drew near the camp; and there they laid down their weapons and
held up their hands in sign of peace.

“We are hastening to our
kinsmen in the Mountain, since we learn that the kingdom of old is renewed.

They meant to push on between the Mountain and the loop
of the river, for the narrow land there did not seem to be strongly guarded.

Bard, of course, refused to allow the dwarves to go straight on to the Mountain.

Also they would be able to
reopen and guard some other gate, so that the besiegers would have to encircle the whole mountain;
and for that they had not sufficient numbers.

“Fools!” laughed Bard, “to come thus beneath the Mountain’s arm!

Winter thunder on a wild wind rolled roaring up and
rumbled in the Mountain, and lightning lit its peak.

Ever since the fall of the Great Goblin of the
Misty Mountains the hatred of their race for the dwarves had been rekindled to fury.

Tidings they had gathered in secret ways; and in all the mountains
there was a forging and an arming.

Then they marched and gathered by hill and valley, going ever
by tunnel or under dark, until around and beneath the great mountain Gundabad of the North, where
was their capital, a vast host was assembled ready to sweep down in time of storm unawares upon
the South.

Then they learned of the death of Smaug, and joy was in their hearts: and they hastened
night after night through the mountains, and came thus at last on a sudden from the North hard on
the heels of Dain.

Not even the ravens knew of their coming until they came out in the broken lands
which divided the Lonely Mountain from the hills behind.

Their only hope was to lure the goblins into the valley between the arms of
the Mountain; and themselves to man the great spurs that struck south and east.

Yet this would be
perilous, if the goblins were in sufficient numbers to overrun the Mountain itself, and so attack them
also from behind and above; but there was no time for make any other plan, or to summon any help.

Soon the thunder passed, rolling away to the South-East; but the bat-cloud came, flying lower, over
the shoulder of the Mountain, and whirled above them shutting out the light and filling them with
dread.

“To the Mountain!” called Bard.

“To the Mountain!

Soon they could see the lands

before the Mountain’s feet black with a hurrying multitude.

As Gandalf had hoped, the
goblin army had gathered behind the resisted vanguard, and poured now in rage into the valley,
driving wildly up between the arms of the Mountain, seeking for the foe.

Their spears
and swords shone in the gloom with a gleam of chill flame, so deadly was the wrath of the hands
that held them.

the dwarves of the Iron Hills plunged in, wielding their mattocks, upon the other side; and
beside them came the men of the Lake with long swords.

Already many
of the goblins were flying back down the river to escape from the trap: and many of their own
wolves were turning upon them and rending the dead and the wounded.

Goblins had scaled the Mountain from the other side and
already many were on the slopes above the Gate, and others were streaming down recklessly,
heedless of those that fell screaming from cliff and precipice, to attack the spurs from above.

Each
of these could be reached by paths that ran down from the main mass of the Mountain in the centre;
and the defenders had too few to bar the way for long.

Now
Bard was fighting to defend the Eastern spur, and yet giving slowly back; and the elf-lords were at
bay about their king upon the southern arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill.

Out leapt the King under the
Mountain, and his companions followed him.

Their friends could not help them, for the assault from the Mountain was
renewed with redoubled force, and upon either side men and elves were being slowly beaten down.

He had taken his stand on Ravenhill among the
Elves-partly because there was more chance of escape from that point, and partly (with the more
Tookish part of his mind) because if he was going to be in a last desperate stand, he preferred on the
whole to defend the Elvenking.

Many
wondering eyes looked up, though as yet nothing could be seen except from the southern shoulders
of the Mountain.

He was lying on the flat stones of
Ravenhill, and no one was near.

He was shaking,
and as chilled as stone, but his head burned with fire.

“Farewell, King under the
Mountain!”

“This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and not a mountain of gold
can amend it.

The
Eagles had long had suspicion of the goblins’ mustering; from their watchfulness the movements in
the mountains could not be altogether hid.

So they too had gathered in great numbers, under the
great Eagle of the Misty Mountains; and at length smelling battle from afar they had come speeding
down the gale in the nick of time.

They it was who dislodged the goblins from the mountain -slopes,
casting them over precipices, or driving them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes.

It
was not long before they had freed the Lonely Mountain, and elves and men on either side of the
valley could come at last to the help of the battle below.

The dwarves were making a stand still about their lords upon
a low rounded hill.

They drove many of them into the
Running River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest River;
and there the greater part of the last fugitives perished, while those that came hardly to the
Wood-elves’ realm were there slain, or drawn in to die in the trackless dark of Mirkwood.

Songs
have said that three parts of the goblin warriors of the North perished on that day, and the mountains
had peace for many a year.

They buried Thorin deep beneath the
Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone upon his breast.

“There let it lie till the Mountain falls!”

There now Dain son of Nain took up
his abode, and he became King under the Mountain, and in time many other dwarves gathered to his
throne in the ancient halls.

From that treasure Bard sent much gold to the Master of Lake-town; and he rewarded his followers
and friends freely.

And turning towards the Mountain he added: “Farewell Thorin
Oakenshield!

So they went on until they drew near to the borders of
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the Forest River ran out.

They intended to go along the edge of the forest, and round its
northern end in the waste that lay between it and the beginning of the Grey Mountains.

Then the elves turned towards the Forest, and Bilbo started on his long road home.

Anyway by mid-winter Gandalf and Bilbo had come all the way back, along both edges of
the Forest, to the doors of Beorn’s house; and there for a while they both stayed.

The goblins of
the Misty Mountains were now few and terrified, and hidden in the deepest holes they could find;
and the Wargs had vanished from the woods, so that men went abroad without fear.

Beorn indeed
became a great chief afterwards in those regions and ruled a wide land between the mountains and
the wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of taking bear’s
shape, and some were grim men and bad, but most were in heart like Beorn, if less in size and
strength.

In their day the last goblins were hunted from the Misty Mountains and a new peace came
over the edge of the Wild.

There far away was the Lonely Mountain on
the edge of eyesight.

The river is flowing,
The stars are all burning!

“Ere long now,” Gandalf was saying, “The Forest will grow somewhat more wholesome.

The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting;
Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting.

They came to the river that marked the very edge of the
borderland of the Wild, and to the ford beneath the steep bank, which you may remember.

At each point on the road Bilbo recalled the
happenings and the words of a year ago-it seemed to him more like ten-so that, of course, he
quickly noted the place where the pony had fallen in the river, and they had turned aside for their
nasty adventure with Tom and Bert and Bill.

Coming to a rise he could see his own Hill in the distance,
and he stopped suddenly and said:
“Roads go ever ever on,
Over rock and under tree,

By caves where never sun has shone,
By streams that never find the sea

;
Over snow by winter sown,
And through the merry flowers of June,
Over grass and over stone,
And under mountains in the moon.

Eyes that fire and sword have seen
And horror in the halls of stone
Look at last on meadows green
And trees and hills they long have known.”

And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by the river and came right back to Bilbo’s
own door.

There was a large notice in
black and red hung on the gate, stating that on June the Twenty-second Messrs. Grubb, Grubb, and
Bun-owes would sell by auction the effects of the late Bilbo Baggins Esquire, of Bag-End,
Underhill, Hobbiton.

The return of Mr. Bilbo Baggins created quite a disturbance, both under the Hill and over the
Hill, and across the Water; it was a great deal more than a nine days’ wonder.

They fell to talking of their times together, of course, and Bilbo asked how things
were going in the lands of the Mountain.

Bard had rebuilt the
town in Dale and men had gathered to him from the Lake and from South and West, and all the
valley had become tilled again and rich, and the desolation was now filled with birds and blossoms
in spring and fruit and feasting in autumn.

And Lake-town was refounded and was more prosperous
than ever, and much wealth went up and down the Running River; and there was friendship in those
parts between elves and dwarves and men.

They are
making songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold.”

