The tunnel wound on
and on, going fairly but not quite straight into the side of the hill – The Hill, as all the people for
many miles round called it – and many little round doors opened out of it, first on one side and then
on another.

No going upstairs for the hobbit: bedrooms, bathrooms, cellars, pantries (lots of these),
wardrobes (he had whole rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same
floor, and indeed on the same passage.

The best rooms were all on the left-hand side (going in), for
these were the only ones to have windows, deep-set round windows looking over his garden and
meadows beyond, sloping down to the river.

The Bagginses had lived
in the neighbourhood of The Hill for time out of mind, and people considered them very
respectable, not only because most of them were rich, but also because they never had any
adventures or did anything unexpected: you could tell what a Baggins would say on any question
without the bother of asking him.

There is little or no magic about them, except the ordinary everyday sort which
helps them to disappear quietly and quickly when large stupid folk like you and me come
blundering along, making a noise like elephants which they can hear a mile off.

They are inclined to
be at in the stomach; they dress in bright colours (chiefly green and yellow); wear no shoes, because
their feet grow natural leathery soles and thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads (which
is curly); have long clever brown fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs
(especially after dinner, which they have twice a day when they can get it).

Now you know enough
to go on with.

It was often said
(in other families) that long ago one of the Took ancestors must have taken a fairy wife.

That was,
of course, absurd, but certainly there was still something not entirely hobbit-like about them, – and
once in a while members of the Took-clan would go and have adventures.

Not that Belladonna Took ever
had any adventures after she became Mrs. Bungo Baggins.

Bungo, that was Bilbo’s father, built the
most luxurious hobbit-hole for her (and partly with her money) that was to be found either under
The Hill or over The Hill or across The Water, and there they remained to the end of their days.

Still

it is probable that Bilbo, her only son, although he looked and behaved exactly like a second edition
of his solid and comfortable father, got something a bit queer in his makeup from the Took side,
something that only waited for a chance to come out.

By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world, when there was less
noise and more green, and the hobbits were still numerous and prosperous, and Bilbo Baggins was
standing at his door after breakfast smoking an enormous long wooden pipe that reached nearly
down to his woolly toes (neatly brushed) –

He had not been down that way under
The Hill for ages and ages, not since his friend the Old Took died, in fact, and the hobbits had
almost forgotten what he looked like.

“Good morning!” said Bilbo, and he meant it.

“Do you wish
me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether I want not; or that you feel good this
morning; or that it is morning to be good on?”
“All of them at once,” said Bilbo.

I am
looking for someone to share in an adventure that I am arranging, and it’s very difficult to find
anyone.”

He had decided that he was not quite his sort, and wanted him to go
away.

He stood leaning on his stick and gazing at the hobbit without
saying anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even a little cross.

“Good morning!”

“What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!” said Gandalf.

“Now you mean that you
want to get rid of me, and that it won’t be good till I move off.”
“Not at all, not at all, my dear sir!

To
think that I should have lived to be good-morninged by Belladonna Took’s son, as if I was selling
buttons at the door!”

Good gracious me!

Not the fellow who used to tell such wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and goblins
and giants and the rescue of princesses and the unexpected luck of widows’ sons?

They used to go up like great lilies and snapdragons and
laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all evening!”

“Not the Gandalf who was responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the
Blue for mad adventures.

“All the same I am pleased to find you remember
something about me.

In fact I will go so far as to send you on
this adventure.

Very amusing for me, very good for you and profitable too, very likely, if you ever
get over it.”

Good morning!

Good-bye!”

He had only just had break fast, but he thought a cake or two and a drink of
something would do him good after his fright.

The next day he had almost forgotten about Gandalf.

he was going to say, when he saw that it was not
Gandalf at all.

It was a dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, and very bright eyes under
his dark-green hood.

“Bilbo Baggins at yours!” said the hobbit, too surprised to ask any questions for the moment.

“So you have got here at last!”

was what he was going to say to Gandalf this time.

He had a horrible thought that the cakes might run short, and
then he-as the host: he knew his duty and stuck to it however painful-he might have to go without.

“A little beer would suit me better, if it is all the same to you, my good sir,” said Balin with
the white beard.

When he got back Balin and Dwalin were talking at the table like old friends (as a matter of
fact they were brothers).

He had only just had a sip-in the corner, while the
four dwarves sat around the table, and talked about mines and gold and troubles with the goblins,
and the depredations of dragons, and lots of other things which he did not understand, and did not
want to, for they sounded much too adventurous-when, ding-dong-a-ling-‘ dang, his bell rang again,
as if some naughty little hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle off.

The poor little hobbit sat down in the hall and put his head in his hands, and wondered what
had happened, and what was going to happen, and whether they would all stay to supper.

Dori, Nori, Ori,
Oin, and Gloin were their names; and very soon two purple hoods, a grey hood, a brown hood, and
a white hood were hanging on the pegs, and off they marched with their broad hands stuck in their
gold and silver belts to join the others.

A big jug of coffee bad just been set in the hearth, the seed-cakes were gone, and the
dwarves were starting on a round of buttered scones, when there came-a loud knock.

“Put on a few eggs, there’s a good fellow!”

“And just bring out the cold chicken and pickles!”
“Seems to know as much about the inside of my larders as I do myself!” thought Mr. Baggins,
who was feeling positively flummoxed, and was beginning to wonder whether a most wretched
adventure had not come right into his house.

By the time he had got all the bottles and dishes and
knives and forks and glasses and plates and spoons and things piled up on big trays, he was getting
very hot, and red in the face, and annoyed.

The dwarves ate and ate, and talked
and talked, and time got on.

He was blowing the most enormous smoke-rings, and wherever he told
one to go, it went-up the chimney, or behind the clock on the man-telpiece, or under the table, or
round and round the ceiling; but wherever it went it was not quick enough to escape Gandalf.

The
Gandalf’s smoke-ring would go green and come back to hover over the wizard’s head.

“Bring out the instruments!”
Kili and Fili rushed for their bags and brought back little fiddles;
Dori, Nori, and Ori brought out flutes from somewhere inside their coats; Bombur produced a
drum from the hall; Bifur and Bofur went out too, and came back with clarinets that they had left
among the walking-sticks Dwalin and Balin said: “Excuse me, I left mine in the porch!”

“Just bring
mine in with you,” said Thorin.

It was a beautiful gold-en harp, and when Thorin struck it the music
began all at once, so sudden and sweet that Bilbo forgot everything else, and was swept away into
dark lands under strange moons, far over The Water and very far from his hobbit-hole under The
Hill.

“Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away ere break of day
To seek the pale enchanted gold.

There many a gloaming golden hoard
They shaped and wrought, and light they caught
To hide in gems on hilt of sword.

On silver necklaces they strung
The flowering stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, in twisted wire
They meshed the light of moon and sun.

Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,
To claim our long-forgotten gold.

Goblets they carved there for themselves
And harps of gold; where no man delves
There lay they long, and many a song
Was sung unheard by men or elves.

The dragon’s ire more fierce than fire
Laid low their towers and houses frail.

Far over the misty mountains grim

To dungeons deep and caverns dim
We must away, ere break of day,
To win our harps and gold from him!”

Then something Tookish woke up inside him, and he wished to go and see the
great mountains, and hear the pine-trees and the waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear a sword
instead of a walking-stick.

Suddenly in the wood
beyond The Water a flame leapt up–probably somebody lighting a wood-fire-and he thought of
plundering dragons settling on his quiet Hill and kindling it all to flames.

He got up trembling.

He had less
than half a mind to fetch the lamp, and more than half a mind to pretend to, and go and hide behind
the beer barrels in the cellar, and not come out again until all the dwarves had gone away.

“Where are you going?” said Thorin, in a tone that seemed to show that he guessed both
halves of the hobbit’s mind.

If he had been allowed, he would probably have gone on like this until he
was out of breath, without telling any one there ‘anything that was not known already.

“Gets funny queer fits, but he
is one of the best, one of the best-as fierce as a dragon in a pinch.”

If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch, you will realise that this was
only poetical exaggeration applied to any hobbit, even to Old Took’s greatgranduncle Bullroarer, who was so huge (for a hobbit) that he could ride a
horse.

He charged the ranks of the goblins of Mount Gram in the Battle of the
Green Fields, and knocked their king Gol-firnbul’s head clean off with a

wooden club.

It sailed a hundred yards through the air and went down a rabbit hole, and in
this way the battle was won and the game of Golf invented at the same moment.

It is all very well for Gandalf to talk about this hobbit being fierce, but one shriek like that in
a moment of excitement would be enough to wake the dragon and all his relatives, and kill the lot of
us.

He suddenly felt he
would go without bed and breakfast to be thought fierce.

“that you think I am no good.

I have no signs on my door-it was painted a week ago-, and I am quite sure you have come to
the wrong house.

I bad a great-great-great-granduncle once,
Bullroarer Took, and -“ “Yes, yes, but that was long ago,” said Gloin.

Burglar wants a
good job, plenty of Excitement and reasonable Reward, that’s how it is usually read.

For very good reasons.

You
asked me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose Mr. Baggins.

Just let any one
say I chose the wrong man or the wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and have all the bad
luck you like, or go back to digging coal.”

He scowled so angrily at Gloin that the dwarf huddled back in his chair; and when Bilbo tried
to open his mouth to ask a question, he turned and frowned at him and stuck oat his bushy
eyebrows, till Bilbo shut his mouth tight with a snap.

“This was made by Thror, your grandfather, Thorin, he said in answer to the dwarves’ excited
questions.

“I don’t see that this will help us much,” said Thorin
disappointedly after a glance.

And I
know where Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great dragons bred.”

“There is a dragon marked in red on the Mountain, said Balin, “but it will be easy enough to
find him without that, if ever we arrive there.”

Old Smaug had lived there long enough now to find out anything there is to know about
those caves.”

‘Five
feet high the door and three may walk abreast’ say the runes, but Smaug could not creep into a hole
that size, not even when he was a young dragon, certainly not after devouring so many of the
dwarves and men of Dale.”

“It seems a great big hole to me,” squeaked Bilbo (who had no experience of dragons and
only of hobbit-holes)

He was getting excited and interested again, so that he forgot to keep his
mouth shut.

“How could such a large door be kept secret from
everybody outside, apart from the dragon?”

“But in what way this one has been hidden we don’t know
without going to see.

“Also,” went on Gandalf, “I forgot to mention that with the map went a key, a small and
curious key.

We thought of going East, as
quiet and careful as we could, as far as the Long Lake.

“We might go from there up along the River Running,” went on Thorin taking no notice, “and
so to the ruins of Dale-the old town in the valley there, under the shadow of the Mountain.

The river runs right out of it through the great cliff at the
South of the Mountain, and out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed.”

“That would be no good,” said the wizard, “not without a mighty Warrior, even a Hero.

I tried
to find one; but warriors are busy fighting one another in distant lands, and in this neighbourhood
heroes are scarce, or simply lot to be found.

Swords in these parts are mostly blunt, and axes are
used for trees, and shields as cradles or dish-covers; and dragons are comfortably far-off (and
therefore legendary).

“First I should like to know a bit more
about things,” said he, feeling all confused and a bit shaky inside, but so far still lookishly
determined to go on with things.

“I mean about the gold and the dragon, and all that, and how it got
there, and who it belongs to, and so on and further.”

“Bless me!” said Thorin, “haven’t you got a
map?

“Also I should like to know about risks, out-of-pocket expenses, time
required and remuneration, and so forth”-by which he meant: “What am I going to get out of it?

and
am I going to come back alive?”
“O very well,” said Thorin.

“Long ago in my grandfather Thror’s time our family was driven
out of the far North, and came back with all their wealth and their tools to this Mountain on the
map.

It had been discovered by my far ancestor, Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they
tunnelled and they made huger halls and greater workshops -and in addition I believe they found a
good deal of gold and a great many jewels too.

Fathers would beg us to take
their sons as apprentices, and pay us handsomely, especially in food-supplies, which we never
bothered to grow or find for ourselves.

Altogether those were good days for us, and the poorest of
us had money to spend and to lend, and leisure to make beautiful things just for the. fun of it, not to
speak of the most marvellous and magical toys, the like of which is not to be found in the world
now-a-days.

“Undoubtedly that was what brought the dragon.

Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know,
from men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; and they guard their plunder as long
as they live (which is practically forever, unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it.

Indeed they hardly know a good bit of work from a bad, though they usually have a good notion of
the current market value; and they can’t make a thing for themselves, not even mend a little loose
scale of their armour.

There were lots of dragons in the North in those days, and gold was probably
getting scarce up there, with the dwarves flying south or getting killed, and all the general waste and
destruction that dragons make going from bad to worse.

Some of the dwarves who happened to be outside (I was one
luckily -a fine adventurous lad in those days, always wandering about, and it saved my life that
day)-well, from a good way off we saw the dragon settle on our mountain in a spout of flame.

The dwarves rushed out of their great
gate; but there was the dragon waiting for them.

The river rushed up in
steam and a fog fell on Dale, and in the fog the dragon came on them and destroyed most of the
warriors-the usual unhappy story, it was only too common in those days.

Probably, for that is the dragons’ way, he has piled it all up in a great heap far
inside, and sleeps on it for a bed.

Later he used to crawl out of the great gate and come by night to
Dale, and carry away people, especially maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all the people
dead or gone.

What goes on there now I don’t know for certain, but I don’t suppose anyone lives
nearer to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now-a-days.

When I asked how they had got away, they told me to hold my tongue,
and said that one day in the proper time I should know.

But we have never forgotten our stolen treasure.

And even
now, when I will allow we have a good bit laid by and are not so badly off”-here Thorin stroked the
gold chain round his neck-“we still mean to get it back, and to bring our curses home to Smaug-if
we can.

But apparently they made a map, and I
should like to know how Gandalf got hold of it, and why it did not come down to me, the rightful
heir.”

“Your grandfather Thror was killed,
you remember, in the mines of Moria by Azog the Goblin -“ “Curse his name, yes,” said Thorin.

“And Thrain your father went away on the twenty-first of April, a hundred years ago last
Thursday, and has never been seen by you since-“ “True, true,” said Thorin.

“Well, your father gave me this to give to you; and if I have chosen my own time and way of
handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble I had to find you.

Your father went away to try his
luck with the map after your grandfather was killed; and lots of adventures of a most unpleasant sort
he had, but he never got near the Mountain.

How he got there I don’t know, but I found him a
prisoner in the dungeons of the Necromancer.”

I was finding things out, as usual; and a nasty dangerous business it was.

I tried to save your father, but it was too late.

He was witless and
wandering, and had forgotten almost everything except the map and the key.”

“We have long ago
paid the goblins of Moria,” said Thorin; “we must give a thought to the Necromancer.”

The dragon and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for
you!”
“Hear, hear!” said Bilbo, and accidentally said it aloud, “Hear what?”

they all said turning
suddenly towards him, and he was so flustered that he answered “Hear what I have got to say!”
“What’s that?”

“Well, I should say that you ought to go East and have a look round.

After all there is the Side-door, and dragons must sleep sometimes, I suppose.

I will give you a good breakfast before you go.”

“Before we go, I suppose you mean,” said Thorin.

After all the others had ordered their breakfasts without so much as a please (which annoyed
Bilbo very much), they all got up.

The hobbit had to find room for them all, and filled all his
spare-rooms and made beds on chairs and sofas, before he got them all stowed and went to his own
little bed very tired and not altogether happy.

The Tookishness was
wearing off, and he was not now quite so sure that he was going on any journey in the morning.

As
he lay in bed he could hear Thorin still humming to himself in the best bedroom next to him:
“Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,
To find our long-forgotten gold.”

Chapter 2
Roast Mutton
Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-gown went into the dining-room.

Indeed he was really
relieved after all to think that they had all gone without him, and without bothering to wake him up
(“but with never a thank-you” he thought); and yet in a way he could not help feeling just a trifle
disappointed.

he said to himself, “thinking of dragons and all that

outlandish nonsense at your age!”

“My dear
fellow,” said he, “whenever are you going to come?

“What’s that got to do with it?

“Thinking it unnecessary to disturb your esteemed repose, we have proceeded in advance to
make requisite preparations, and shall await your respected person at the Green Dragon Inn,
Bywater, at II a.m. sharp.

Off you go!”

Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater just on
the stroke of eleven, and found he had come without a pocket-handkerchief!

“Up you two get, and off we go!” said Thorin.

“I’m awfully sorry,” said Bilbo, “but I have come without my hat, and I have left my
pocket-handkerchief behind, and I haven’t got any money.

You will have to manage without
pocket-handkerchiefs, and a good many other things, before you get to the journey’s end.

As for a
hat, I have got a spare hood and cloak in my luggage.”

What his father Bungo would have thought of him, I daren’t think.

At first they had passed
through hobbit-lands, a wild respectable country inhabited by decent folk, with good roads, an inn
or two, and now and then a dwarf or a farmer ambling by on business.

Now they had gone on
far into the Lone-lands, where there were no people left, no inns, and the roads grew steadily worse.

Mostly it had been as good as May can be, even in
merry tales, but now it was cold and wet.

“And I’m sure the rain has got into the dry
clothes and into the food-bags,” thought Bilbo.

Somewhere behind the grey clouds the sun must have gone down, for it began to get
dark.

Wind got up, and the willows along the river-bank bent and sighed.

Also the mischief seemed to have got into the fire.

Dwarves can make a fire almost anywhere out of
almost anything, wind or no wind; but they could not do it that night, not even Oin and Gloin, who
were specially good at it.

He got into the
river before they could catch him; and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili were nearly
drowned, and all the baggage that he carried was washed away off him.

Some
said they could but go and see, and anything was better than little supper, less breakfast, and wet
clothes all the night.

They have seldom even heard of the king round here, and the
less inquisitive you are as you go along, the less trouble you are likely to find.”

Others said: “Where has Gandalf got to?”

“After all we have got a burglar with us,” they said; and so they made
off, leading their ponies (with all due and proper caution) in the direction of the light.

Up the hill they went; but there was no proper path to be seen,
such as might lead to a house or a farm; and do what they could they made a deal of rustling and
crackling and creaking (and a good deal of grumbling and drafting), as they went through the trees
in the pitch dark.

“You must go on and find out all about that light, and
what it is for, and if all is perfectly safe and canny,” said Thorin to the hobbit.

Off Bilbo had to go, before he could explain that he could not hoot even once like any kind of
owl any more than fly like a bat.

So, naturally,
he got right up to the fire-for fire it was without disturbing anyone.

Also there
was a barrel of good drink at hand, and they were drinking out of jugs.

“What the ‘ell
William was a-thinkin’ of to bring us into these parts at all, beats me – and the drink runnin’ short,
what’s more,” he said jogging the elbow of William, who was taking a pull at his jug.

Either he should have gone back quietly and warned his friends that there were three fair-sized trolls
at hand in a nasty mood, quite likely to try toasted dwarf, or even pony, for a change; or else he
should have done a bit of good quick burgling.

He
had read of a good many things he had never seen or done.

He was very much alarmed, as well as
disgusted; he wished himself a hundred miles away, and yet-and yet somehow he could not go
straight back to Thorin and Company empty-handed.

“What’s a burrahobbit got to do with my pocket, anyways?” said William.

I am a good cook
myself, and cook bet-ter than I cook, if you see what I mean.

Let him go!”

Then there was a gorgeous row.

Soon they were
locked in one another’s arms, and rolling nearly into the fire kicking and thumping, while Tom
whacked at then both with a branch to bring them to their senses-and that of course only made them
madder than ever.

But his poor little feet had
been very squashed in Bert’s big paw, and he had no breath in his body, and his head was going
round; so there he lay for a while panting, just outside the circle of firelight.

They had forgotten all about him.

He caught up a big branch all on fire at one end; and Bert got that
end in his eye before he could step aside.

Tom got
the branch in his teeth for that, and lost one of the front ones.

“No good roasting ‘em now, it’d take all night,” said a voice.

So they got a black pot, and they took out their knives.

“No good boiling ‘em!

We ain’t got no water, and it’s a long way to the well and all,” said a
voice.

And there they stand to this day, all alone, unless the birds
perch on them; for trolls, as you probably know, must be underground before dawn, or they go back
to the stuff of the mountains they are made of, and never move again.

“Excellent!” said Gandalf, as he stepped from behind a tree, and helped
Bilbo to climb down out of a thorn-bush.

“Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-picking,” said Bombur, “when what we
wanted was fire and food!”

“And that’s just what you wouldn’t have got of those fellows without a struggle, in any case,”
said Gandalf.

They searched about, and soon found the marks of trolls’ stony boots going away through the
trees.

“Would this be any good?” asked Bilbo, when they were getting tired and angry.

There
were bones on the floor and a nasty smell was in the air; but there was a good deal of food jumbled
carelessly on shelves and on the ground, among an untidy litter of plunder, of all sorts from brass
buttons to pots full of gold coins standing in a corner.

It would have made only a tiny pocket-knife for a troll, but it was as good
as a short sword for the hobbit.

“These look like good blades,” said the wizard, half drawing them and looking at them
curiously.

By that time
they felt like breakfast, and being very hungry they did not turn their noses up at what they had got
from the trolls’ larder.

Then they I brought up their ponies,
and carried away the pots of gold, and buried them very secretly not far from the track by the river,
putting a great many spells over them, just in case they ever had the-chance to come back and
recover them.

“Where did you go to, if I may ask?” said Thorin to Gandalf as they rode along.

I had not gone very far, however, when I met a couple of friends of mine from
Rivendell.”

“You will get there in a few days now, if we’re lucky, and
find out all about it As I was saying I met two of Elrond’s people.

They camped
under the stars, and their horses had more to eat than they had; for there was plenty of grass, but
there was not much in their bags, even with what they had got from the trolls.

When they got to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw that the great mountains
had marched down very near to them.

That sounded nice and comforting, but they had not got there yet, and it was not so easy
as it sounds to find the Last Homely House west of the Mountains.

There seemed to be no trees and
no valleys and no hills to break the ground in front of them, only one vast slope going slowly up
and up to meet the feet of the nearest mountain, a wide land the colour of heather and crumbling
rock, with patches and slashes of grass-green and moss-green showing where water might be.

His head and beard wagged this
way and that as he looked for the stones, and they followed his head, but they seemed no nearer to
the end of the search when the day began to fail.

Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed
supper-time would soon do the same.

Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered and slipped in the dusk down the steep zig-zag path into
the secret valley of Rivendell.

The air grew warmer as they got lower, and the smell of the
pine-trees made him drowsy, so that every now and again he nodded and nearly fell off, or bumped
his nose on the pony’s neck.

What are you doing,
And where are you going?

The faggots are reeking,
The bannocks are baking!

Where are you going
With beards all a-wagging?

No knowing, no knowing
What brings Mister Baggins,
And Balin and Dwalin
down into the valley
in June
ha! ha!
O!

Are you going to stay a bit and sing with us, or
will you go straight on?

Elves know a lot and are wondrous folk for news, and know
what is going on among the peoples of the land, as quick as water flows, or quicker.

On they all went,
leading their ponies, till they were brought to a good path and so at last to the very brink of the
river.

There was only a narrow bridge of stone without a parapet,
as narrow as a pony could well walk on; and over that they had to go, slow and careful, one by one,
each leading his pony by the bridle.

Good People!

and good night!” said Gandalf, who came last.

Good night!”

Now it is a strange thing, but things that are good to have and days that are good to spend are
soon told about, and not much to listen to; while things that are uncomfortable, palpitating, and
even gruesome, may make a good tale, and take a deal of telling anyway.

They stayed long in that
good house, fourteen days at least, and they found it hard to leave.

The master of the house was an elf-friend-one of those people whose fathers came into the
strange stories before the beginning of History, the wars of the evil goblins and the elves and the
first men in the North.

Their bags were filled
with food and provisions light to carry but strong to bring them over the mountain passes.

So the time came to mid– summer eve, and they were to
go on again with the early sun on midsummer morning.

They were made in Gondolin for the Goblin-wars.

They must
have come from a dragon’s hoard or goblin plunder, for dragons and goblins destroyed that city
many ages ago.

This, Thorin, the runes name Orcrist, the Goblin-cleaver in the ancient tongue of
Gondolin; it was a famous blade.

This, Gandalf, was Glamdring, Foe-hammer that the king of
Gondolin once wore.

I
have heard that there are still forgotten treasures of old to be found in the deserted caverns of the
mines of Moria, since the dwarf and goblin war.”

“May it soon cleave goblins once again!”

He took it and gazed long at it, and he shook his head; for if he did not
altogether approve of dwarves and their love of gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness,
and he grieved to remember the ruin of the town of Dale and its merry bells, and the burned banks
of the bright River Running.

These must have been written on a midsummer’s eve in a crescent moon, a long while ago.”

“What do they say?” asked Gandalf and Thorin together, a bit vexed perhaps that even Elrond
should have found this out first, though really there had not been a chance before, and there would
not have been another until goodness knows when.

But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes
our skill in these days to guess when such a time will come again.”

Now they rode away amid songs of
farewell and good speed, with their hearts ready for more adventure, and with a knowledge of the
road they must follow over the Misty Mountains to the land beyond.

The dwarves and the hobbit, helped by the
wise advice of Elrond and the knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the right road to the right
pass.

Long days after they had climbed out of the valley and left the Last Homely House miles
behind, they were still going up and up and up.

“The summer is getting on down below,” thought Bilbo, “and haymaking is going on and
picnics.

They will be harvesting and blackberrying, before we even begin to go down the other side
at this rate.”

And the others were thinking equally gloomy thoughts, although when they had said
good-bye to Elrond in the high hope of a midsummer morning, they’ had spoken gaily of the
passage of the mountains, and of riding swift across the lands beyond.

Dwarves had not passed that way for many years, but Gandalf had, and he knew how evil and
danger had grown and thriven in the Wild, since the dragons had driven men from the lands, and the
goblins had spread in secret after the battle of the Mines of Moria.

Even the good plans of wise
wizards like Gandalf and of good friends like Elrond go astray sometimes when you are off on
dangerous adventures over the Edge of the Wild; and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know it.

The lightning splinters on the peaks, and rocks shiver, and great
crashes split the air and go rolling and tumbling into every cave and hollow; and the darkness is
filled with overwhelming noise and sudden light.

They had very sharp eyes, and being the youngest of
the dwarves by some fifty years they usually got these sort of jobs (when everybody could see that
it was absolutely no use sending Bilbo).

There is nothing like looking, if you want to find
something (or so Thorin said to the young dwarves).

You certainly usually find something, if you
look, but it is not always quite the something you were after.

“It isn’t all that big, and it does not go far back.”

That, of course, is the dangerous part about caves: you don’t know how far they go back,
sometimes, or where a passage behind may lead to, or what is waiting for you inside.

But now Fili
and Kill’s news seemed good enough.

So they all got up and prepared to move.

Still it was not very far to go, and before long they came to a big rock standing out into the
path.

As they
passed under the arch, it was good to hear the wind and the rain outside instead of all about them,
and to feel safe from the giants and their rocks.

He lit up his
wand – as he did that day in Bilbo’s dining-room that seemed so long ago, if you remember-, and by
its light they explored the cave from end to end.

So they spread out their wet things on the
floor, and got dry ones out of their bundles; then they made their blankets comfortable, got out their
pipes and blew smoke rings, which Gandalf turned into different colours and set dancing up by the
roof to amuse them.

They talked and talked, and forgot about the storm, and discussed what each
would do with his share of the treasure (when they got it, which at the moment did not seem so
impossible); and so they dropped off to sleep one by one.

It turned
out a good thing that night that they had brought little Bilbo with them, after all.

For somehow, he
could not go to sleep for a long while; and when he did sleep, he had very nasty dreams.

He
dreamed that a crack in the wall at the back of the cave got bigger and bigger, and opened wider and
wider, and he was very afraid but could not call out or do anything but lie and look.

Then he
dreamed that the floor of the cave was giving way, and he was slipping-beginning to fall down,
down, goodness knows where to.

Out jumped the goblins, big goblins, great ugly-looking goblins, lots of goblins, before you
could say rocks and blocks.

Bilbo’s yell had done that much good.

It had wakened him up wide in a splintered second,
and when goblins came to grab him, there was a terrible flash like lightning in the cave, a smell like
gunpowder, and several of them fell dead.

Of that neither they nor the goblins had any idea, and the goblins did not wait to find
out.

It was deep, deep, dark, such as only goblins that have taken to living in the heart of the
mountains can see through.

The passages there were crossed and tangled in all directions, but the
goblins knew their way, as well as you do to the nearest post-office and the way went down and
down, and it was most horribly stuffy.

The goblins were very rough, and pinched unmercifully, and
chuckled and laughed in their horrible stony voices; and Bilbo was more unhappy even than when
the troll had picked him up by his toes.

The goblins began to sing, or croak,
keeping time with the flap of their flat feet on the stone, and shaking their prisoners as well.

And down down to Goblin-town
You go, my lad!
Clash, crash!

Knocker and gongs!

Nor dare to shirk,
While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh,
Round and round far underground
Below, my lad!”
It sounded truly terrifying.

The general meaning of the song was only too plain; for
now the goblins took out whips and whipped them with a swish, smack!, and set them running as
fast as they could in front of them; and more than one of the dwarves were already yammering and
bleating like anything, when they stumbled into a big cavern.

It was lit by a great red fire in the
middle, and by torches along the walls, and it was full of goblins.

They all laughed and stamped and
clapped their hands, when the dwarves (with poor little Bilbo at the back and nearest to the whips)
came running in, while the goblin-drivers whooped and cracked their whips behind.

The ponies
were already there huddled in a corner; and there were all the baggages and packages lying broken
open, and being rummaged by goblins, and smelt by goblins, and fingered by goblins, and quarreled
over by goblins.

For goblins eat horses and ponies and donkeys (and other much more dreadful
things), and they are always hungry.

The goblins chained their hands behind their backs and linked them all together in a
line and dragged them to the far end of the cavern with little Bilbo tugging at the end of the row.

There in the shadows on a large flat stone sat a tremendous goblin with a huge head, and
armed goblins were standing round him carrying the axes and the bent swords that they use.

Now
goblins are cruel, wicked, and bad-hearted.

It is not unlikely that they invented some of the machines that
have since troubled the world, especially the ingenious devices for killing large numbers of people
at once, for wheels and engines and explosions always delighted them, and also not working with
their own hands more than they could help; but in those days and those wild parts they had not
advanced (as it is called) so far.

But they had a special grudge against Thorin’s people,
because of the war which you have heard mentioned, but which does not come into this tale; and
anyway goblins don’t care who they catch, as long as it is done smart and secret, and the prisoners
are not able to defend themselves.

“Who are these miserable persons?” said the Great Goblin.

“What do you mean by it?” said the Great Goblin turning to Thorin.

“Up to no good, I’ll
warrant!

What have you got to say?”
“Thorin the dwarf at your service!”

We sheltered from a storm in what seemed a
convenient cave and unused; nothing was further from our thoughts than inconveniencing goblins in
any way whatever.”

“Urn!” said the Great Goblin.

Might I ask what you were doing up in the
mountains at all, and where you were coming from, and where you were going to?

Not that it willdo you much good, Thorin Oakenshield, I know too much
about your folk already; but let’s have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly
uncomfortable for you!”

The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage when he looked at it, and all his soldiers
gnashed their teeth, clashed their shields, and stamped.

It had killed
hundreds of goblins in its time, when the fair elves of Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle
before their walls.

They had called it Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter.

the Great
Goblin shouted.

into a tower of blue glowing smoke, right up to
the roof, that scattered piercing white sparks all among the goblins.

The sparks were burning holes in the goblins, and the smoke that
now fell from the roof made the air too thick for even their eyes to see through.

Soon they were
falling over one another and rolling in heaps on the floor, biting and kicking and fighting as if they
had all gone mad.

Bilbo saw it go right through the Great Goblin as
he stood dumbfounded in the middle of his rage.

He fell dead, and the goblin soldiers fled before
the sword shrieking into the darkness.

“Follow me quick!” said a voice fierce and quiet; and
before Bilbo understood what had happened he was trotting along again, as fast as he could trot, at
the end of the line, down more dark passages with the yells of the goblin-hall growing fainter
behind him.

Of course it was Gandalf; but just then they were too busy to
ask how he got there.

It
burned with a rage that made it gleam if goblins were about; now it was bright as blue flame for
delight in the killing of the great lord of the cave.

It made no trouble whatever of cutting through the
goblin-chains and setting all the prisoners free as quickly as possible.

The goblins just called it Beater, and hated it worse
than Biter if possible.

Orcrist, too, had been saved; for Gandalf had brought it along as well,
snatching it from one of the terrified guards.

it might be worse, and
then again it might be a good deal better.

No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we
are, and hordes of angry goblins just behind!

On we go!”

Gandalf was quite right:
they began to hear goblin noises and horrible cries far behind in the passages they had come
through.

That sent them on faster than ever, and as poor Bilbo could not possibly go half as fast-for
dwarves can roll along at a tremendous pace, I can tell you, when they have to-they took it in turn to
carry him on their backs.

Still goblins go faster than dwarves, and these goblins knew the way better
(they had made the paths themselves), and were madly angry; so that do what they could the
dwarves heard the cries and howls getting closer and closer.

Soon they could hear even the flap of
the goblin feet, many many feet which seemed only just round the last corner.

“Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit on a treasure hunt!” said poor Bombur,
who was fat, and staggered along with the sweat dripping down his nose in his heat and terror.

There was nothing else to be done; and the goblins
did not like it.

They came scurrying round the corner in full cry, and found Goblin-cleaver and
Foe-hammer shining cold and bright right in their astonished eyes.

By that time the
dwarves had gone on again, a long, long, way on into the dark tunnels of the goblins’ realm.

When
the goblins discovered that, they put out their torches and they slipped on soft shoes, and they chose
out their very quickest runners with the sharpest ears and eyes.

But they were seen by the

goblins that ran silently up behind, for Gandalf was letting his wand give out a faint light to help the
dwarves as they went along.

Very slowly he got up and groped about on all fours, till he touched the wall of the tunnel; but
neither up nor down it could he find anything: nothing at all, no sign of goblins, no sign of dwarves.

His head was swimming, and he was far from certain even of the direction they had been going in
when he had his fall.

He guessed as well as he could, and crawled along for a good way, till
suddenly his hand met what felt like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of the tunnel.

He did not go much further,
but sat down on the cold floor and gave himself up to complete miserableness, for a long while.

He could not think what to do; nor could he think what had happened; or why he had been left
behind; or why, if he had been left behind, the goblins had not caught him; or even why his head
was so sore.

Then he felt for
matches and he could not find any at all, and that shattered his hopes completely.

Goodness knows what the striking of matches and
the smell of tobacco would have brought on him out of dark holes in that horrible place.

But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all round himself for
matches his hand came on the hilt of his little sword – the little dagger that he got from the trolls,
and that he had quite forgotten; nor do the goblins seem to have noticed it, as he wore it inside his
breeches.

“So it is an elvish blade, too,” he
thought; “and goblins are not very near, and yet not far enough.”

It was rather splendid to be wearing a blade made in
Gondolin for the goblin-wars of which so many songs had sung; and also he had noticed that such
weapons made a great impression on goblins that came upon them suddenly.

“Go back?” he thought.

“No good at all!

Go sideways?

Go forward?

On we go!”

So up he got, and trotted along with his little sword held in front of him and one
hand feeling the wall, and his heart all of a patter and a pitter.

Hobbits are not quite like ordinary
people; and after all if their holes are nice cheery places and properly aired, quite different from the
tunnels of the goblins, still they are more used to tunnelling than we are, and they do not easily lose
their sense of direction underground-not when their heads have recovered from being bumped.

Also
they can move very quietly, and hide easily, and recover wonderfully from falls and bruises, and
they have a fund of wisdom and wise sayings that men have mostly never heard or have forgotten
long ago.

All he knew was that it was still going down pretty steadily and keeping in

the same direction in spite of a twist and a turn or two.

Of these he took no notice, except to hurry past for fear of goblins or half-imagined dark
things coming out of them.

I do not know how long he kept on like this, hating to go on, not
daring to stop, on, on, until he was tireder than tired.

There are strange things living in the pools and lakes in
the hearts of mountains: fish whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows how many years ago,
and never swam out again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger and bigger from trying to see in
the blackness; also there are other things more slimy than fish.

Even in the tunnels and caves the
goblins have made for themselves there are other things living unbeknown to them that have
sneaked in from outside to lie up in the dark.

Some of these caves, too, go back in their beginnings
to ages before the goblins, who only widened them and joined them up with passages, and the
original owners are still there in odd comers, slinking and nosing about.

Deep down here by the dark water lived old Gollum, a small slimy creature.

He was Gollum – as dark as darkness, except for two
big round pale eyes in his thin face.

Goblin he
thought good, when he could get it; but he took care they never found him out.

They had come on the lake, when they were
tunnelling down long ago, and they found they could go no further; so there their road ended in that
direction, and there was no reason to go that way-unless the Great Goblin sent them.

Sometimes he
took a fancy for fish from the lake, and sometimes neither goblin nor fish came back.

Actually Gollum lived on a slimy island of rock in the middle of the lake.

Bilbo could not see him, but he was
wondering a lot about Bilbo, for he could see that he was no goblin at all.

Gollum got into his boat and shot off from the island, while Bilbo was sitting on the brink
altogether flummoxed and at the end of his way and his wits.

Suddenly up came Gollum and
whispered and hissed:
“Bless us and splash us, my precioussss!

I guess it’s a choice feast; at least a tasty morsel it’d
make us, gollum!”

And when he said gollum he made a horrible swallowing noise in his throat.

That is how he got his name, though he always called himself ‘my precious.’

“What iss he, my preciouss?” whispered Gollum (who always spoke to himself through never
having anyone else to speak to).

This is what he had come to find out, for he was not really very
hungry at the moment, only curious; otherwise he would have grabbed first and whispered
afterwards.

“What’s he got in his handses?” said Gollum, looking at the sword, which he did not quite
like.

“A sword, a blade which came out of Gondolin!”
“Sssss,” said Gollum, and became quite polite.

He was anxious to appear friendly, at any rate for
the moment, and until he found out more about the sword and the hobbit, whether he was quite
alone really, whether he was good to eat, and whether Gollum was really hungry.

Asking them, and sometimes guessing them, had been the only game he had ever
played with other funny creatures sitting in their holes in the long, long ago, before he lost all his
friends and was driven away, alone, and crept down, down, into the dark under the mountains.

“Very well,” said Bilbo, who was anxious to agree, until he found out more about the creature,
whether he was quite alone, whether he was fierce or hungry, and whether he was a friend of the
goblins.

So Gollum hissed:
“What has roots as nobody sees,
Is taller than trees,
Up, up it goes,

We shows it the way out, yes!”
“All right!” said Bilbo, not daring to disagree, and nearly bursting his brain to think of riddles
that could save him from being eaten.

It was rather an old one, too, and Gollum knew the answer as well as you do.

“That eye is like to this eye”
Said the first eye,
“But in low place,
Not in high place.””
“Ss, ss, ss,” said Gollum.

But just as Bilbo was beginning to hope that the wretch would not be able to answer,
Gollum brought up memories of ages and ages and ages before, when he lived with his grandmother
in a hole in a bank by a river, “Sss, sss, my preciouss,” he said.

Unfortunately for Gollum Bilbo had heard that sort of thing before; and the answer was all
round him anyway.

“A box without hinges, key, or lid,
Yet golden treasure inside is hid,”
he asked to gain time, until he could think of a really hard one.

But it proved a nasty poser for Gollum.

But suddenly Gollum remembered thieving from nests long ago, and sitting under the river
bank teaching his grandmother, teaching his grandmother to suck-“Eggses!”

But he could not remember anything better at the moment, he was so flustered by the
egg-question.

All the same it was a poser for poor Bilbo, who never had anything to do with the
water if he could help it.

After a while Gollum began to hiss with pleasure to himself: “Is it nice, my preciousss?

“I gave you a good long chance just now.”

“It must make haste, haste!” said Gollum, beginning to climb out of his boat on to the shore to
get at Bilbo.

Gollum was dreadfully disappointed; but Bilbo asked another riddle as quick as ever be could,
so that Gollum had to get back into his boat and think.

“No-legs lay on one-leg, two-legs sat near on three-legs, four-legs got some.”

Gollum might have
had some trouble guessing it, if he had asked it at another time.

“Fish on a little table, man at table sitting
on a stool, the cat has the bones”-that of course is the answer, and Gollum soon gave it.

Gollum began to get out of his boat.

But all that came
out with a sudden squeal was:
“Time! Time!”
Bilbo was saved by pure luck.

Gollum was disappointed once more; and now he was getting angry, and also
tired of the game.

This time he did not go back to the
boat.

“It’s got to ask uss a quesstion, my preciouss, yes, yess, yesss.

Jusst one more quesstion to
guess, yes, yess,” said Gollum.

But Bilbo simply could not think of any question with that nasty wet
cold thing sitting next to him, and pawing and poking him.

ask us!” said Gollum.

There he found the ring he had picked up in the passage and forgotten
about.

“What have I got in my pocket?” he said aloud.

He was talking to himself, but Gollum
thought it was a riddle, and he was frightfully upset.

“It isn’t fair, my
precious, is it, to ask us what it’s got in its nassty little pocketses?”
Bilbo seeing what had happened and having nothing better to ask stuck to his question.

“What
have I got in my pocket?” he said louder.

“S-s-s-s-s,” hissed Gollum.

“Handses!” said Gollum.

“Guess again!”
“S-s-s-s-s,” said Gollum more upset than ever.

He thought of all the things he kept in his own
pockets: fishbones, goblins’ teeth, wet shells, a bit of bat-wing, a sharp stone to sharpen his fangs
on, and other nasty things.

“Wrong!” said Bilbo, who had lost his some time ago.

Now Gollum was in a
much worse state than when Bilbo had asked him the egg-question.

He tried to sound bold and cheerful, but he did not
feel at all sure how the game was going to end, whether Gollum guessed right or not.

“String, or nothing!” shrieked Gollum, which was not quite fair-working in two guesses at
once.

And after all that last question had not been a genuine riddle
according to the ancient laws.

But at any rate Gollum did not at once attack him.

I want to go.

But what has
it got in its pocketses, eh?

Oh no! gollum!”

“Cross it is, impatient, precious,”
hissed Gollum.

We can’t go up the tunnels so hasty.

We must go and
get some things first, yes, things to help us.”

“Well, hurry up!” said Bilbo, relieved to think of Gollum going away.

What was Gollum
talking about?

Gollum did mean to come back.

He had a ring, a golden
ring, a precious ring.

But who knows how
Gollum came by that present, ages ago in the old days when such rings were still at large in the
world?

Gollum used to wear it at first,
till it tired him; and then he kept it in a pouch next his skin, till it galled him; and now usually he hid
it in a hole in the rock on his island, and was always going back to look at it.

Then he would creep along dark passages looking for stray goblins.

Only a few hours ago he had worn it, and caught a small goblin-imp.

Still
he waited a while; for he had no idea how to find his way out alone.

Gollum was cursing and wailing
away in the gloom, not very far off by the sound of it.

He was on his island, scrabbling here and
there, searching and seeking in vain.

“It mustn’t ask us,” shrieked Gollum.

“Not its business, no, gollum!

It’s losst, gollum, gollum, gollum.”

Come and let me out, and then go on with your looking!”

Utterly miserable as Gollum sounded, Bilbo could not find much pity in his heart, and he had
a feeling that anything Gollum wanted so much could hardly be something good.

Gollum answered.

“We must search for it, it’s lost, gollum.”

“But you never guessed my last question, and you promised,” said Bilbo.

“Never guessed!”
said Gollum.

“What has it got in its pocketses?
Tell us that.

Gollum’s mind had jumped to a guess quicker than his; naturally, for Gollum had brooded
for ages on this one thing, and he was always afraid of its being stolen.

“But it wasn’t a fair question,” said Gollum.

“Not a riddle, precious, no.”
“Oh well, if it’s a matter of ordinary questions,” Bilbo replied, “then I asked one first.

“What has it got in its pocketses?”

As suspicion
grew in Gollum’s mind, the light of his eyes burned with a pale flame.

But now the light in Gollum’s eyes had become a
green fire, and it was coming swiftly nearer.

Gollum was in his boat again, paddling wildly back to
the dark shore; and such a rage of loss and suspicion was in his heart that no sword had any more
terror for him.

Bilbo could not guess what had maddened the wretched creature, but he saw that all
was up, and that Gollum meant to murder him at any rate.

“What has it got in its pocketses?” he heard the hiss loud behind him, and the splash as
Gollum leapt from his boat.

He turned now and saw Gollum’s eyes like small green lamps
coming up the slope.

In a moment Gollum was on him.

But before Bilbo could do anything, recover his breath, pick
himself up, or wave his sword, Gollum passed by, taking no notice of him, cursing and whispering
as he ran.

Gollum could see in the dark.

Painfully he got up, and sheathed his sword, which was now
glowing faintly again, then very cautiously he followed.

It was no
good crawling back down to Gollum’s water.

Perhaps if he followed him, Gollum might lead him to
some way of escape without meaning to.

hissed Gollum.

It’s gone!

What has it got in
its pocketses?

H^ hurried a
little, getting as close as he dared behind Gollum, who was still going quickly, not looking back, but
turning his head from side to side, as Bilbo could see from the faint glimmer on the walls.

It’s gone, gollum.”

Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to weep, a whistling and gurgling sound horrible to
listen to.

After a while Gollum stopped
weeping and began to talk.

“It’s no good going back there to search, no.

The Baggins has got it in its pocketses; the nassty noser has found it, we
says.”

We can’t know till we find the nassty creature and
squeezes it.

It
doesn’t know, and it can’t go far.

It won’t say what it’s got in its
pocketses.

“The goblinses will catch it then.

“Ssss, sss, gollum!
Goblinses!

Yes, but if it’s got the present, our precious present, then goblinses will get it, gollum!

They’ll find it, they’ll find out what it does.

We shan’t ever be safe again, never, gollum!

One of the

goblinses will put it on, and then no one will see him.

Not even our
clever eyeses will notice him; and he’ll come creepsy and tricksy and catch us, gollum, gollum!”

If the Baggins has gone that way, we must
go quick and see.

Go!

With a spring Gollum got up and started
shambling off at a great pace.

Still
there it was: Gollum with his bright eyes had passed him by, only a yard to one side.

On they went,
Gollum flip-flapping ahead, hissing and cursing; Bilbo behind going as softly as a hobbit can.

Gollum began at once to count them.

Goblins might be about, and he had
lost his ring.

“But we durstn’t go in, precious, no we durstn’t.

Goblinses
down there.

Lots of goblinses.

Gollum had brought Bilbo to the way out after all, but Bilbo
could not get in!

There was Gollum sitting humped up right in the opening, and his eyes gleamed
cold in his head, as he swayed it from side to side between his knees.

Bilbo crept away from the wall more quietly than a mouse; but Gollum stiffened at once, and
sniffed, and his eyes went green.

Gollum
had no sword.

Gollum had not actually threatened to kill him, or tried to yet.

Straight over Gollum’s head he jumped, seven
feet forward and three in the air; indeed, had he known it, he only just missed cracking his skull on
the low arch of the passage.

Gollum threw himself backwards, and grabbed as the hobbit flew over him,but too late: his
hands snapped on thin air, and Bilbo, falling fair on his sturdy feet, sped off down the new tunnel.

He did not turn to see what Gollum was doing.

Gollum was defeated.

He dared go no further.

“If goblins are so near that
he smelt them,” he thought, “then they’ll have heard his shrieking and cursing.

“A bit low for goblins, at least for the big ones,” thought Bilbo, not knowing that even the big ones,
the ores of the mountains, go along at a great speed stooping low with their hands almost on the
ground.

Soon the passage that had been sloping down began to go up again, and after a while it
climbed steeply.

Bilbo blinked, and then suddenly he saw the goblins: goblins in full armour with drawn
swords sitting just inside the door, and watching it with wide eyes, and watching the passage that
led to it.

With yells of delight the
goblins rushed upon him.

A pang of fear and loss, like an echo of Gollum’s misery, smote Bilbo,
and forgetting even to draw his sword he struck his hands into his pockets.

The goblins stopped short.

“Go back up the passage!”

Whistles blew, armour clashed, swords rattled, goblins cursed and swore and ran hither and
thither, falling over one another and getting very angry.

Bilbo was dreadfully frightened, but he had the sense to understand what had happened and to
sneak behind a big barrel which held drink for the goblin-guards, and so get out of the way and
avoid being bumped into, trampled to death, or caught by feel.

The place was
full of goblins running about, and the poor little hobbit dodged this way and that, was knocked over
by a goblin who could not make out what he had bumped into, scrambled away on all fours, slipped
between the legs of the captain just in time, got up, and ran for the door.

It was still ajar, but a goblin had pushed it nearly to.

His
buttons had got wedged on the edge of the door and the door-post.

Suddenly one of the goblins inside shouted: “There is a shadow by the door.

He was through, with a torn coat and waistcoat, leaping down the steps like a goat, while
bewildered goblins were still picking up his nice brass buttons on the doorstep.

They could not
find Bilbo with the ring on, slipping in and out of the shadow of the trees, running quick and quiet,

and keeping out of the sun; so soon they went back grumbling and cursing to guard the door.

Chapter 6
Out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire
Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not know where he was.

“Good heavens!”

“I seem to have got right to the other side of the Misty
Mountains, right to the edge of the Land Beyond!

Where and O where can Gandalf and the dwarves
have got to?

I only hope to goodness they are not still back there in the power of the goblins!”

He wondered whether he
ought not, now he had the magic ring, to go back into the horrible, horrible, tunnels and look for his
friends.

It did not sound like
goblins; so he crept forward carefully.

He
had still got the ring on, for fear of meeting something unexpected and unpleasant, and he saw that
Balin was looking straight at him without noticing him.

The dwarves were grumbling,
and Gandalf was saying that they could not possibly go on with their journey leaving Mr. Baggins
in the hands of the goblins, without trying to find out if he was alive or dead, and without trying to
rescue him.

I wish to goodness you had not lost him.”

“If we have got to’ go back now into
those abominable tunnels to look for him, then drat him, I say.”

Gandalf answered angrily: “I brought him, and I don’t bring things that are of no use.

Either
you help me to look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of the mess as best you can
yourselves.

If we can only find him again, you will thank me before all is over.

Whatever did you
want to go and drop him for, Dori?”
“You would have dropped him,” said Dori, “if a goblin had suddenly grabbed your leg from
behind in the dark, tripped up your feet, and kicked you in the back!”

“Then why didn’t you pick him up again?”
“Good heavens!

Goblins fighting and biting in the dark, everybody falling over
bodies and hitting one another!

All of a sudden you gave one of your blinding
flashes, and we saw the goblins running back yelping.

Then they wanted to know all about his adventures after they had lost him, and he sat down
and told them everything-except about the finding of the ring (“not just now” he thought).

They
were particularly interested in the riddle-competition, and shuddered most appreciatively at his
description of Gollum.

“And then I couldn’t think of any other question with him sitting beside me,” ended Bilbo;
“so I said ‘what’s in my pocket?’

And he couldn’t guess in three goes.

I got stuck in the door, which was only open a crack, and I lost lots of buttons,” he said sadly
looking at his torn clothes.

The dwarves looked at him with quite a new respect, when he talked about dodging guards,
jumping over Gollum, and squeezing through, as if it was not very difficult or very alarming.

Then he had questions of his own to ask, for if Gandalf had explained it all by now to the
dwarves, Bilbo had not heard it.

He wanted to know how the wizard had turned up again, and where
they had all got to now.

The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded explaining his cleverness more
than once, so now he had told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had been well aware of the presence of
evil goblins in that part of the mountains.

Evidently
people had given up going that way, and the goblins must have opened their new entrance at the top
of the pass the dwarves had taken, quite recently, because it had been found quite safe up to now.

“I must see if I can’t find a more or less decent giant to block it up again,” said Gandalf, “or
soon there will be no getting over the mountains at all.”

In the flash which
killed the goblins that were grabbing him he had nipped inside the crack, just as it snapped to.

“Touch and go!”

But, of course, Gandalf had made
a special study of bewitchments with fire and lights (even the hobbit had never forgotten the magic
fireworks at Old Took’s midsummer-eve parties, as you remember).

The rest we all know – except

that Gandalf knew all about the back-door, as the goblins called the lower gate, where Bilbo lost his
buttons.

“They made that gate ages ago,” he said, “partly for a way of escape, if they needed one;
partly as a way out into the lands beyond, where they still come in the dark and do great damage.

After all they had lost a good deal, but they had killed
the Great Goblin and a great many others besides, and they had all escaped, so they might be said to
have had the best of it so far.

he said in answer to more questions from the hobbit.

“You lose track of time inside
goblin-tunnels.

We have gone miles and miles, and come right down through the heart of the mountains,
and are now on the other side-quite a short cut.

“Can’t help it,” said Gandalf, “unless you like to go back and ask the goblins nicely to let you
have your pony back and your luggage.”

He nibbled a bit of
sorrel, and he drank from a small mountain-stream that crossed the path, and he ate three wild
strawberries that he found on its bank, but it was not much good.

When they began to go down this, rubbish and small pebbles rolled away from their
feet; soon larger bits of split stone went clattering down and started other pieces below them
slithering and rolling; then lumps of rocks were disturbed and bounded off, crashing down with a
dust and a noise.

It was the trees at the bottom that saved them.

Some caught hold of the trunks and swung themselves into lower branches,
some (like the little hobbit) got behind a tree to shelter from the onslaught of the rocks.

“Well! that has got us on a bit,” said Gandalf; “and even goblins tracking us will have a job to
come down here quietly.”

“I daresay,” grumbled Bombur; “but they won’t find it difficult to send
stones bouncing down on our heads.”

We are going to turn aside here
out of the path of the slide.

The sun had long gone behind the
mountains.

At times they were pushing through a sea of bracken
with tall fronds rising right above the hobbit’s head; at times they were marching along quiet as
quiet over a floor of pine-needles; and all the while the forest-gloom got heavier and the
forest-silence deeper.

There was no wind that evening to bring even a sea-sighing into the branches
of the trees.

“Must we go any further?” asked Bilbo, when it was so dark that he could only just see
Thorin’s beard wagging beside him, and so quiet that he could hear the dwarves’ breathing like a
loud noise.

It was answered by another away to the right and a good deal nearer to them, then by another
not far away to the left.

Even magic rings are not much use against wolves-especially against the
evil packs that lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested mountains, over the Edge of the Wild
on the borders of the unknown.

Wolves of that sort smell keener than goblins, and do not need to
see you to catch you!

“Escaping goblins to be caught by wolves!”
he said, and it became a proverb, though we now say ‘out of the frying-pan into the fire’ in the same
sort of uncomfortable situations.

You would have laughed (from a safe distance), if you had seen the
dwarves sitting up in the trees with their beards dangling down, like old gentlemen gone cracked
and playing at being boys.

Dwalin and Balin had swarmed up a tall slender fir with few branches and were trying to
find a place to sit in the greenery of the topmost boughs.

Gandalf, who was a good deal taller than
the others, had found a tree into which they could not climb, a large pine standing at the very edge
of the glade.

A wolf snapped–
at his cloak as he swung up, and nearly got him.

The Wargs and the
goblins often helped one another in wicked deeds.

Goblins do not usually venture very far from
their mountains, unless they are driven out and are looking for new homes, or are marching to war
(which I am glad to say has not happened for a long while).

But in those days they sometimes used
to go on raids, especially to get food or slaves to work for them.

Then they often got the Wargs to
help and shared the plunder with them.

Now
it seemed that a great goblin-raid had been planned for that very night.

The Wargs had come to meet
the goblins and the goblins were late.

The reason, no doubt, was the death of the Great Goblin, and
all the excitement caused by the dwarves and Bilbo and the wizard, for whom they were probably
still hunting.

But now they had planned with the goblins’ help to come by night upon some of the
villages nearest the mountains.

If their plan had been carried out, there would have been none left
there next day; all would have been killed except the few the goblins kept from the wolves and
carried back as prisoners to their caves.

The
Wargs were angry and puzzled at finding them here in their very meeting-place.

They thought they
were friends of the woodmen, and were come to spy on them, and would take news of their plans
down into the valleys, and then the goblins and the wolves would have to fight a terrible battle
instead of capturing prisoners and devouring people waked suddenly from their sleep.

So the Wargs
had no intention of going away and letting the people up the trees escape, at any rate not until
morning.

And long before that, they said, goblin soldiers would be coming down from the
mountains; and goblins can climb trees, or cut them down.

All the same he was not going
to let them have it all their own way, though he could not do very much stuck up in a tall tree with
wolves all round on the ground below.

If a spark got in their coats it stuck and burned into them, and
unless they rolled over quick they were soon all in flames.

Are the goblins at mischief in the woods?”
He swept up into the air, and immediately two of his guards from the rocks at either hand
leaped up to follow him.

Also he could see the
glint of the moon on goblin spears and helmets, as long lines of the wicked folk crept down the
hillsides from their gate and wound into the wood.

They did not love goblins, or fear them.

The goblins hated the eagles and feared them, but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive them
from the mountains.

Tonight the Lord of the Eagles was filled with curiosity to know what was afoot; so he
summoned many other eagles to him, and they flew away from the mountains, and slowly circling
ever round and round they came down, down, down towards the ring of the wolves and the
meeting-place of the goblins.

A very good thing too!

Dreadful things had been going on down there.

Then suddenly goblins came running up yelling.

They thought a battle with
the woodmen was going on; but they goon learned what had really happened.

Goblins are not afraid of fire, and they soon had a plan which seemed to them most
amusing.

Some got all the wolves together in a pack.

Smoke was in Bilbo’s eyes, he
could feel the heat of the flames; and through the reek he could see the goblins dancing round and
round in a circle like people round a midsummer bonfire.

He could hear the goblins beginning a horrible song:

Why don’t you sing?”
“Go away!

The sudden splendour flashed from his wand like lightning, as he got ready to spring down
from on high right among the spears of the goblins.

Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagles swept down from above, seized him in his talons,
and was gone.

There was a howl of anger and surprise from the goblins.

The wolves yammered and gnashed their teeth; the goblins yelled
and stamped with rage, and flung their heavy spears in the air in vain.

Over them swooped the
eagles; the dark rush of their beating wings smote them to the floor or drove them far away; their
talons tore at goblin faces.

Other birds flew to the tree-tops and seized the dwarves, who were
scrambling up now as far as ever they dared to go.

Now far below the goblins and the wolves were scattering far and wide in the woods.

Bilbo never forgot that flight,
clinging onto Dori’s ankles.

There he lay without speaking, and his thoughts
were a mixture of surprise at being saved from the fire, and fear lest he fell off that narrow place
into the deep shadows on either side.

“The Lord of the Eagles bids you to bring your prisoners to the
Great Shelf,” he cried and was off again.

There was no path down on to it save by flying; and no path down off
it except by jumping over a precipice.

It seemed that Bilbo was not going to be eaten after all.

So you see ‘prisoners’ had meant ‘prisoners rescued from the
goblins’ only, and not captives of the eagles.

As Bilbo listened to the talk of Gandalf he realized that
at last they were going to escape really and truly from the dreadful mountains.

we are glad to cheat the goblins of their sport, and glad
to repay our thanks to you, but we will not risk ourselves for dwarves in the southward plains.”
“Very well,” said Gandalf.

Bilbo was too weak to help, and
anyway he was not much good at skinning rabbits or cutting up meat, being used to having it
delivered by the butcher all ready to cook.

Gandalf, too, was lying down after doing his part in
setting the fire going, since Oin and Gloin had lost their tinder-boxes.

But all night he
dreamed of his own house and wandered in his sleep into all his different rooms looking for
something that he could not find nor remember what it looked like.

He jumped up to look at the
time and to go and put his kettle on-and found he was not home at all.

What is finer than flying?”
Bilbo would have liked to say: “A warm bath and late breakfast on the lawn afterwards;” but
he thought it better to say nothing at all, and to let go his clutch just a tiny bit.

After a good while the eagles must have seen the point they were making for, ‘even from their
great height, for they began to go down circling round in great spirals.

And though the lord of the eagles became in after days the King of All Birds and wore a golden
crown, and his fifteen chieftains golden collars (made of the gold that the dwarves gave them),
Bilbo never saw them again-except high and far off in the battle of Five Armies.

“I always meant to see you all safe (if possible) over the mountains,” said the wizard, “and
now by good management and good luck I have done it.

Indeed we are now a good deal further east
than I ever meant to come with you, for after all this is not my adventure.

They had begun to think
Gandalf was going in come all the way and would always be there to help them out of difficulties.

“I am not going to disappear this very instant,” said he.

Probably
I can help you out of your present plight, and I need a little help myself.

Very few people live in these parts, unless they have come here since I
was last down this way, which is some years ago.

He
does not come here often, certainly not in the daytime, and it is no good waiting for him.

We must go and find him; and if all goes well at our meeting, I think I
shall be off and wish you like the eagles ‘farewell wherever you fare!’

They offered him dragon-gold and silver and jewels, but he would not change his mind.

he said, “and I think I have earned already some of your
dragon-gold – when you have got it.”

“Couldn’t you find someone more
easy-tempered?

“Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!” said Gandalf.

“Don’t be a fool Mr. Baggins if you
can help it; and in the name of all wonder don’t mention the word furrier again as long as you are
within a hundred miles of his house, nor, rug, cape, tippet, muff, nor any other such unfortunate
word!

Others say that he is a man
descended from the first men who lived before Smaug or the other dragons came into this part of
the world, and before the goblins came into the hills out of the North.

He is not the sort of person to ask questions of.

I once saw him sitting all alone on the top of the Carrock at night watching the
moon sinking towards the Misty Mountains, and I heard him growl in the tongue of bears; ‘The day
will come when they will perish and I shall go back!’

That is why I believe he once came from the
mountains himself.”
Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think about, and they asked no more questions.

The drones were bigger than your thumb, a good deal, and the
bands of yellow on their deep black bodies shone like fiery gold.

“You had better wait here,” said the wizard to the dwarves; “and when I call or whistle begin
to come after me – you will see the way I go-but only in pairs, mind, about five minutes between
each pair of you.

“They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers,” said Gandalf.

“That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family
and unimpeachable reputation,” said Gandalf.

“I have heard
of you, if you have not heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin Radagast who
lives near the Southern borders of Mirkwood?”
“Yes; not a bad fellow as wizards go, I believe.

“To tell you the truth, we have lost our luggage and nearly lost our way, and are rather in need
of help, or at least advice.

I may say we have had rather a bad time with goblins in the mountains.”
“Goblins?” said the big man less gruffly.

What did you go near them for?”

Though it

was summer there was a wood-fire burning and the smoke was rising to the blackened rafters in
search of the way out through an opening in the roof.

It faced south and was still warm and filled with the
light of the westering sun which slanted into it, and fell golden on the garden full of flowers that
came right up to the steps.

“Go on, call away!”

I am not
over fond of dwarves; but if it is true you are Thorin (son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe), and
that your companion is respectable, and that you are enemies of goblins and are not up to any
mischief in my lands-what are you up to, by the way?”

We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the road
that lies to the south of your country, when we were attacked by the evil goblins-as I was about to
tell you.”

“Go on telling, then!” said Beorn, who was never very polite.

Killed, eaten, gone home?”
“Well, no.

You see, we are
very much afraid that we are rather a lot for you to entertain.”
“Go on, whistle again!

When I want your help I will ask for it.

“As soon as we were asleep,” went on Gandalf, “a
crack at the back of the cave opened; goblins came out and grabbed the hobbit and the dwarves and
our troop of ponies-“ “Troop of ponies?

Or were you carrying
lots of goods?

“Now go on again!” said Beorn to the wizard.

I killed a goblin or two with a flash-“ “Good!”
growled Beorn.

“It is some good being a wizard, then.”

I followed down into the main hall, which was crowded with goblins.

The Great Goblin was
there with thirty or forty armed guards.

Or have you still got some more jacks that haven’t yet come out of their boxes?”
“Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now – Fili and Kili, I believe,” said Gandalf, as
these two now appeared and stood smiling and bowing.

Now go on, Gandalf!”

But look here,
Gandalf, even now we have only got yourself and ten dwarves and the hobbit that was lost.

Beorn did not show it more than he could help, but
really he had begun to get very interested.

When Gandalf came to their climbing into trees with the wolves all underneath, he got up and
strode about and muttered:
“I wish I had been there!

“Well,” said
Gandalf very glad to see that his tale was making a good impression, “I did the best I could.

There
we were with the wolves going mad underneath us and the forest beginning to blaze in places, when
the goblins came down from the hills and discovered us.

Fifteen birds in five fir-trees...” “Good heavens!” growled Beorn.

“Don’t pretend
that goblins can’t count.

“Well, now there are fifteen of you; and since goblins can count, I suppose that is all that
there were up the trees.

He never invited people into his house, if he could help it.

He had very few
friends and they lived a good way away; and he never invited more than a couple of these to his
house at a time.

Now he had got fifteen strangers sitting in his porch!

By the time the wizard had finished his tale and had told of the eagles’ rescue and of how they
had all been brought to the Carrock, the sun had fallen behind the peaks of the Misty Mountains and
the shadows were long in Beorn’s garden.

“A very good tale!” said he.

If all beggars could tell
such a good one, they might find me kinder.

Quickly they got out boards and trestles from the side walls and set them up near the fire.

They were not forgotten.

There they had a supper, or a dinner, such as they had not had since they left the Last Homely
House in the West and said good-bye to Elrond.

The dwarves listened and shook their beards, for they knew that they must soon venture into
that forest and that after the mountains it was the worst of the perils they had to pass before they
came to the dragon’s stronghold.

They spoke most of gold and
silver and jewels and the making of things by smith-craft, and Beorn did not appear to care for such
things: there were no things of gold or silver in his hall, and few save the knives were made of
metal at all.

Beorn was gone.

It passed the lonely Mountain bare
and swept above the dragon’s lair :

We
have been about looking for Beorn ever since the sun got up; but there is no sign of him anywhere,
though we found breakfast laid as soon as we went out.”

“Where is Gandalf?” asked Bilbo, moving off to find something to eat as quick as he could.

“One question at a time-and none till after supper!

“I will answer the second question first,” he said, “-but bless me!

They must have looked very queer from outside, popping out into the air one after another,
green, blue, red, silver-grey, yellow, white; big ones, little ones; little ones dodging through big ones
and joining into figure-eights, and going off like a flock of birds into the distance.

In that direction only one
set of footprints led-none coming, only ones going away from here.

And now I think I have answered your first question, too,” ended Gandalf, and he sat a
long while silent.

“What shall we do,” he cried, “if he leads all
the Wargs and the goblins down here?

You had better go to bed, your wits are sleepy.”

The hobbit felt quite crushed, and as there seemed nothing else to do he did go to bed; and
while the dwarves were still singing songs he dropped asleep, still puzzling his little head about
Beorn, till he dreamed a dream of hundreds of black bears dancing slow heavy dances round and
round in the moonlight in the courtyard.

He picked up the hobbit and laughed: “Not eaten up by
Wargs or goblins or wicked bears yet I see”; and he poked Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat most
disrespectfully.

Beorn was most jolly for a change; indeed he seemed
to be in a splendidly good humour and set them all laughing with his funny stories; nor did they
have to wonder long where he had been or why he was so nice to them, for he told them himself.

From the burnt wolf– glade he had soon found out
that part of their story was true; but he had found more than that: he had caught a Warg and a goblin
wandering in the woods.

From these he had got news: the goblin patrols were still hunting with
Wargs for the dwarves, and they were fiercely angry because of the death of the Great Goblin, and
also because of the burning of the chief wolf’s nose and the death from the wizard’s fire of many of
his chief servants.

So much they told him when he forced them, but he guessed there was more
wickedness than this afoot, and that a great raid of the whole goblin army with their wolf-allies into
the lands shadowed by the mountains might soon be made to find the dwarves, or to take vengeance
on the men and creatures that lived there, and who they thought must be sheltering them.

“It was a good story, that of yours,” said Beorn, “but I like it still better now I am sure it is
true.

As it is, I can
only say that I have hurried home as fast as I could to see that you were safe, and to offer you any
help that I can.

Killed the Great Goblin, killed the
Great Goblin!”

“What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?” asked Bilbo suddenly.

A goblin’s head was stuck outside the gate and a
warg-skin was nailed to a tree just beyond.

But now he was their friend,
and Gandalf thought it wise to tell him their whole story and the reason of their journey, so that they
could get the most help he could offer.

He would provide ponies for each of them, and a
horse for Gandalf, for their journey to the forest, and he would lade them with food to last them for

weeks with care, and packed so as to be as easy as possible to carry-nuts, flour, sealed jars of dried
fruits, and red earthenware pots of honey, and twice-baked cakes that would keep good a long time,
and on a little of which they could march far.

The making of these was one of his secrets; but honey
was in them, as in most of his foods, and they were good to eat, though they made one thirsty.

“Water is not easy to find there, nor food.

The time is not yet come for nuts (though it may be past
and gone indeed before you get to the other side), and nuts are about all that grows there fit for
food; in there the wild things are dark, queer, and savage.

But I doubt very much whether anything you find
in Mirkwood will be wholesome to eat or to drink.

Beyond the edge of
the forest I cannot help you much; you must depend on your luck and your courage and the food I
send with you.

But their spirits sank at his grave words,
and they all felt that the adventure was far more dangerous than they had thought, while all the time,
even if they passed all the perils of the road, the dragon was waiting at the end.

Soon after midday they ate with Beorn for the last time, and after
the meal they mounted the steeds he was lending them, and bidding him many farewells they rode
off through his gate at a good pace.

But Beorn had warned them that that way was now
often used by the goblins, while the forest-road itself, he bad heard, was overgrown and disused at
the eastern end and led to impassable marshes where the paths had long been lost.

Its eastern
opening had also always been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain, and would have left them
still with a long and difficult northward march when they got to the other side.

“The goblins,” Beorn had said, “will not dare to cross the Great River for a hundred miles
north of the Carrock nor to come near my house – it is well protected at night!–

Still you are safer going north,
even though you seem to be going back nearer to their strongholds; for that is what they will least
expect, and they will have the longer ride to catch you.

The sun had only just turned west when they started, and till evening it lay golden on the
land about them.

It was difficult to think of pursuing goblins behind, and when they had put many
miles between them and Beorn’s house they began to talk and to sing again and to forget the dark
forest-path that lay in front.

But in the evening when the dusk came on and the peaks of the

mountains glowered against the sunset they made a camp and set a guard, and most of them slept
uneasily with dreams in which there came the howl of hunting wolves and the cries of goblins.

So they rode now for two more days, and all the
while they saw nothing save grass and flowers and birds and scattered trees, and occasionally small
herds of red deer browsing or sitting at noon in the shade.

Mr. Baggins’ eyes are sharper than yours, if you have not seen each night after dark
a great bear going along with us or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps.

Then they knew that Gandalf was going to leave them at the very edge of Mirkwood, and they
were in despair.

I have told you before that he has more about him than you guess, and you will find that out
before long.

Think of the treasure at the end, and forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate
until tomorrow morning!”

Then at last they said good-bye to their ponies and turned their heads for home.

He had gone just inside the forest after
breakfast (a very poor one), and it had seemed as dark in there in the morning as at night, and very
secret: “a sort of watching and waiting feeling,” he said to himself.

“Good-bye!” said Gandalf to Thorin.

“And good-bye to you all, good-bye!

Don’t stray off the track!-if you do, it is a thousand to one you will
never find it again and never get out of Mirkwood; and then I don’t suppose I, or any one else, will
ever see you again.”

“Do we really have to go through?” groaned the hobbit.

You must either go
through or give up your quest.

And I am not going to allow you to back out now, Mr. Baggins.

You have got to look after all these dwarves for me,” he laughed.

I meant, is there no way round?”
“There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out of your way north, and twice that
south.

Remember you are over the Edge of the Wild now, and in for all sorts of fun wherever you go.

Before you could get round Mirkwood in the North you would be right among the slopes of the
Grey Mountains, and they are simply stiff with goblins, hobgoblins, and rest of the worst
description.

I don’t
advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark tower!

“Good-bye!

“Good-bye then, and really good-bye!” said
Gandalf, and he turned his horse and rode down into the West.

They heard his voice come faintly: “Good-bye!

Be good,
take care of yourselves-and DON’T LEAVE THE PATH!”

“O good-bye and go away!” grunted the
dwarves, all the more angry because they were really filled with dismay at losing him.

As Bilbo’s sharp inquisitive eyes
got used to seeing things he could catch glimpses of them whisking off the path and scuttling
behind tree-trunks.

It was not long before they grew to hate the forest as heartily as they had hated the tunnels of
the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending.

But they had to go on and on, long
after they were sick for a sight of the sun and of the sky, and longed for the feel of wind on their
faces.

It seemed to bring hundreds and
hundreds of eyes all round them, though the creatures, whatever they were, were careful never to let
their bodies show in the little flicker of the flames.

They tried shooting at the
squirrels, and they wasted many arrows before they managed to bring one down on the path.

I should have thought it was thirty at least, but my eyes don’t see as well as
they used a hundred years ago.

Still twelve yards is as good as a mile.

“Can any of you throw a rope?”
“What’s the good of that?

The boat is sure to be tied up, even if we could hook it, which I
doubt.”
“I don’t believe it is tied,” said Bilbo, “though of course I can’t be sure in this light; but it
looks to me as if it was just drawn up on the bank, which is low just there where the path goes down
into the water.”

Kili came to his help, and then Oin and Gloin.

“Help!”

“That was a good pull, my lads; and a good job that our rope was the stronger.”
“Who’ll cross first?” asked Bilbo.

How are you going to push the boat back to the far bank?” asked the
hobbit.

“Give me another length of rope and another hook,” said Fili, and when they had got it ready,
he cast into the darkness ahead and as high as he could throw it.

The shadows swallowed it up, but they heard the sound of
hooves quickly falter and then go still.

They were still
standing over him, cursing their ill luck, and Bombur’s clumsiness, and lamenting the loss of the
boat which made it impossible for them to go back and look for the hart, when they became aware
of the dim blowing of horns in the wood and the sound as of dogs baying far off.

Then they all fell
silent; and as they sat it seemed they could hear the noise of a great hunt going by to the north of the
path, though they saw no sign of it.

None seemed to find their
mark.

The laughter was the laughter of fair voices not of goblins, and the singing was beautiful, but it
sounded eerie and strange, and they were not comforted, rather they hurried on from those parts
with what strength they had left.

Two days later they found their path going downwards and before
long they were in a valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth of oaks.

Poor Mr. Baggins had never had much practice in climbing trees,
but they hoisted him up into the lowest branches of an enormous oak that grew right out into the
path, and up he had to go as best he could.

He pushed his way through the tangled twigs with many
a slap in the eye; he was greened and grimed from the old bark of the greater boughs; more than
once he slipped and caught himself just in time; and at last, after a dreadful struggle in a difficult
place where there seemed to be no convenient branches at all, he got near the top.

All the time he

was wondering whether there were spiders in the tree, and how he was going to get down again
(except by falling).

It was no good.

His heart, that had been lightened by the sight of the sun and the feel of the
wind, sank back into his toes: there was no food to go back to down below.

He got to the bottom again at last scratched, hot, and miserable,
and he could not see anything in the gloom below when he got there.

“The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all directions!

He could not make out where he was at all, nor
why he felt so hungry; for he had forgotten everything that had happened since they started their
journey that May morning long ago.

I
dreamed I was walking in a forest rather like this one, only lit with torches on the trees and lamps
swinging from the branches and fires burning on the ground; and there was a great feast going on,
going on for ever.

This they did all that day, going very slowly
and wearily, while Bombur kept on wailing that his legs would not carry him and that he wanted to
lie down and sleep.

“Let your legs take their share, we have carried you far enough.”
All the same he suddenly refused to go a step further and flung himself on the ground.

“Go
on, if you must,” he said.

“I’m just going to lie here and sleep and dream of food, if I can’t get it
any other way.

Even Bombur got up, and
they hurried along then, not caring if it was trolls or goblins.

The light was in front of them and to
the left of the path, and when at last they had drawn level with it, it seemed plain that torches and
fires were burning under the trees, but a good way off their track.

“A feast would be no good, if we never got back alive from
it,” said Thorin.

They argued about it backwards and forwards for a long while,
until they agreed at length to send out a couple of spies, to creep near the lights and find out more
about them.

But then they could not agree on who was to be sent: no one seemed anxious to run the
chance of being lost and never finding his friends again.

In the end, in spite of warnings, hunger
decided them, because Bombur kept on describing all the good things that were being eaten,
according to his dream, in the woodland feast; so they all left the path and plunged into the forest
together.

After a good deal of creeping and crawling they peered round the trunks and looked into a
clearing where some trees had been felled and the ground levelled.

The smell of the roast meats was so enchanting that, without waiting to consult one another,
every one of them got up and scrambled forwards into the ring with the one idea of begging for
some food.

They
were lost in a completely lightless dark and they could not even find one another, not for a long
time at any rate.

By that time they
had, of course, quite forgotten in what direction the path lay, and they were all hopelessly lost, at
least till morning.

There was nothing for it but to settle down for the night where they were; they did not even
dare to search on the ground for scraps of food for fear of becoming separated again.

When they got near Thorin said: “No rushing
forward this time!

When they got to the edge of the circle of lights they
pushed Bilbo suddenly from behind.

It was no good.

And
they simply could not find the hobbit.

“I was having such a lovely dream,” he grumbled, “all about having a most gorgeous dinner.”

“Good heavens!

he has gone like Bombur,” they said.

Dream-dinners aren’t any good, and we can’t share them.”

“They are the best I am likely to get in
this beastly place,” he muttered, as he lay down beside the dwarves and tried to go back to sleep and
find his dream again.

After lying and listening for a while, they found they could not resist the desire to go nearer
and try once more to get help.

Up they got again; and this time the result was disastrous.

The feast
that they now saw was greater and more magnificent than before; and at the head of a long line of
feasters sat a woodland king with a crown of leaves upon his golden hair, very much as Bombur had
described the figure in his dream.

But the cries of the others got steadily further and fainter, and
though after a while it seemed to him they changed to yells and cries for help in the far distance, all
noise at last died right away, and he was left alone in complete silence and darkness.

But he soon made up his mind that it was no good trying to do
anything till day came with some little light, and quite useless to go blundering about tiring himself
out with no hope of any breakfast to revive him.

Something like a strong sticky string was against his left hand, and when he tried to move he found
that his legs were already wrapped in the same stuff, so that when he got up he fell over.

As it was, he had a desperate fight
before he got free.

Somehow the killing of the
giant spider, all alone by himself in the dark without the help of the wizard or the dwarves or of
anyone else, made a great difference to Mr. Baggins.

Bilbo felt that it was unsafe to shout, and he stood a long while wondering in what direction
the path lay, and in what direction he should go first to look for the dwarves.

In the end he made as good a guess as he could at the direction from which the cries for help
had come in the night – and by luck (he was born with a good share of it) be guessed more or less
right, as you will see.

“What nasty thick skins they have to be sure,
but I’ll wager there is good juice inside.”

Bilbo was a pretty fair shot with a
stone, and it did not take him long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that fitted his hand cosily.

As a boy he used to practise throwing stones at things, until rabbits and squirrels, and even
birds, got out of his way as quick as lightning if they saw him stoop; and even grownup he had still
spent a deal of his time at quoits, dart-throwing, shooting at the wand, bowls, ninepins and other
quiet games of the aiming and throwing sort-indeed he could do lots of things, besides blowing
smoke-rings, asking riddles and cooking, that I haven’t had time to tell you about.

After that there was a deal of commotion in the
spider-colony, and they forgot the dwarves for a bit, I can tell you.

They could not see Bilbo, but
they could make a good guess at the direction from which the stones were coming.

When about fifty had gone off to
the place where he had stood before, he threw some more stones at these, and at others that had
stopped behind; then dancing among the trees he began to sing a song to infuriate them and bring
them all after him,and also to let the dwarves hear his voice.

You’ll never catch me up your tree!”
Not very good perhaps, but then you must remember that he had to make it up himself, on the
spur of a very awkward moment.

I am far more sweet than other meat,
but still they cannot find me!

They followed him into
the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as he dared.

In the meanwhile
he had to rescue them.

I don’t suppose he would have managed it, if a spider had not luckily left a rope hanging
down; with its help, though it stuck to his hand and hurt him, he scrambled up-only to meet an old
slow wicked fat-bodied spider who had remained behind to guard the prisoners, and had been busy
pinching them to see which was the juiciest to eat.

If he cut the string which hung him up, the wretched dwarf would tumble thump to the ground a
good way below.

Somehow or other Fili was got on to the branch, and then he did his
best to help the hobbit, although he was feeling very sick and ill from spider-poison, and from
hanging most of the night and the next day wound round and round with only his nose to breathe
through.

In this way they rescued Kili, Bifur, Bofur, Don and Nori.

He had taken off his ring when he rescued Fili and forgotten to put it on
again, so now they all began to splutter and hiss:

he’s got a sting has he?

While this was going on, the other dwarves were working at the rest of the captives, and
cutting at the threads with their knives.

There they were at last, twelve of them counting poor old Bombur,
who was being propped up on either side by his cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur; and Bilbo was
dancing about and waving his Sting; and hundreds of angry spiders were goggling at them all round

and about and above.

But it could not
go on for long.

He was rather sorry about it, but it could not be helped.

“I am going to disappear,” he said.

They were sick and weary, and they could not go much better than a hobble and a wobble,
though many of the spiders were close behind.

“Go on!

Go on!”

But it seemed that
some good magic lingered in such spots, which the spiders did not like.

put very soon they began to ask questions.

They had to have the whole vanishing business carefully explained, and the finding of the ring
interested them so much that for a while they forgot their own troubles.

Balin in particular insisted
on having the Gollum story, riddles and all, told all over again, with the ring in its proper place.

But
after a time the light began to fail, and then other questions were asked.

Where were they, and
where was their path, and where was there any food, and what were they going to do next?

These
questions they asked over and over again, and it was from little Bilbo that they seemed to expect to
get the answers.

Indeed they
really expected him to think of some wonderful plan for helping them, and were not merely
grumbling.

Some of them even got up and bowed right to the
ground before him, though they fell over with the effort, and could not get on their legs again for

some time.

But there was nothing, nothing at all; and none of them Were fit to go and look for anything,
or to search for the lost path.

“Gollum!

Good old
Bilbo-Bilbo-Bilbo-bo-bo-bo-

Still elves
they were and remain, and that is Good People.

This great cave, from
which countless smaller ones opened out on every side, wound far underground and had many
passages and wide halls; but it was lighter and more wholesome than any goblin-dwelling, and
neither so deep nor so dangerous.

It is only fair to say that the
dwarves gave a different account, and said that they only took what was their due, for the elf -king
had bar– gained with them to shape his raw gold and silver, and had afterwards refused to give them

their pay.

Consequently Thorin was angry
at their treatment of him, when they took their spell off him and he came to his senses; and also he
was determined that no word of gold or jewels should be dragged out of him.

The king looked sternly on Thorin, when he was brought before him, and asked him many
questions.

They gave him food and drink, plenty of both, if not very fine;
for Wood-elves were not goblins, and were reasonably well-behaved even to their worst enemies,
when they captured them.

There in the king’s dungeon poor Thorin lay; and after he had got over his thankfulness for
bread and meat and water, he began to wonder what had become of his unfortunate friends.

Chapter 9
Barrels Out of Bond
The day after the battle with the spiders Bilbo and the dwarves made one last despairing effort
to find a way out before they died of hunger and thirst.

They got up and staggered on in the
direction which eight out of the thirteen of them guessed to be the one in which the path lay; but
they never found out if they were right.

Each dwarf was blindfold,
but that did not make much difference, for even Bilbo with the use of his eyes could not see where
they were going, and neither he nor the others knew where they had started from anyway.

Bilbo had
all he could do to keep up with the torches, for the elves were making the dwarves go as fast as ever
they could, sick and weary as they were.

These were not
like those of the goblin-cities: they were smaller, less deep underground, and filled with a cleaner
air.

Long and searchingly he questioned the dwarves about their doings, and where they were
going to, and where they were coming from; but he got little more news out of them than out of
Thorin.

Such a question of course made the king angrier than
ever, and he answered: “It is a crime to wander in my realm without leave.

After all the
disturbance you have made I have a right to know what brings you here, and if you will not tell me
now, I will keep you all in prison until you have learned sense and manners!”

Poor Mr. Baggins – it was a weary long time that he lived in that place all alone, and always
in hiding, never daring to take off his ring, hardly daring to sleep, even tucked away in the darkest
and remotest comers he could find.

And when he did go out, which was
not very often, he did no good.

He did not wish to desert the dwarves, and indeed he did not know
where in the world to go without them.

“I am like a burglar that can’t get away, but must
go on miserably burgling the same house day after day,” he thought.

He often wished, too, that he could
get a message for help sent to the wizard, but that of course was quite impossible; and he soon
realized that if anything was to be done, it would have to be done by Mr. Baggins, alone and
unaided.

Eventually, after a week or two of this sneaking sort of life, by watching and following the
guards and taking what chances he could, he managed to find out where each dwarf was kept.

He
found all their twelve cells in different parts of the palace, and after a time he got to know his way

about very well.

At last after many
difficulties he managed to find the place when no one was about, and to have a word with the chief
of the dwarves.

Thorin was too wretched to be angry any longer at his misfortunes, and was even
beginning to think of telling the king all about his treasure and his quest (which shows how
low-spirited he had become), when he heard Bilbo’s little voice at his keyhole.

For Thorin
had taken heart again hearing how the hobbit had rescued his companions from the spiders, and was
determined once more not to ransom himself with promises to the king of a share in the treasure,
until all hope of escaping in any other way had disappeared; until in fact the remarkable Mr.
Invisible Baggins (of whom he began to have a very high opinion indeed) had altogether failed to
think of something clever.

The other dwarves quite agreed when they got the message.

They all thought their own shares
in the treasure (which they quite regarded as theirs, in spite of their plight and the still unconquered
dragon) would suffer seriously if the Wood-elves claimed part of it, and they all trusted Bilbo.

Perhaps that war part of his reason for going off and
leaving them.

One invisible ring
was a very fine thing, but it was not much good among fourteen.

But of course, as you have
guessed, he did rescue his friends in the end, and this is how it happened.

But the portcullis
was often open, for a good deal of traffic went out and in by the water-gate.

The wine, and other goods, were brought from far away, from their kinsfolk in the
South, or from the vineyards of Men in distant lands.

Hiding behind one of the largest barrels Bilbo discovered the trapdoors and their use, and
lurking there, listening to the talk of the king’s servants, he learned how the wine and other goods
came up the rivers, or over land, to the Long Lake.

It seemed a town of Men still throve there, built
out on bridges far into the water as a protection against enemies of all sorts, and especially against
the dragon of the Mountain.

Then Bilbo heard the
king’s butler bidding the chief of the guards good-night.

I shall be hard at
work tonight clearing the cellars of the empty wood, so let us have a drink first to help the labour.”
“Very good,” laughed the chief of the guards.

He followed the two elves, until they entered a small cellar
and sat down at a table on which two large flagons were set.

It must be potent wine to make a wood-elf
drowsy; but this wine, it would seem, was the heady vintage of the great gardens of Dorwinion, not
meant for his soldiers or his servants, but for the king’s feasts only, and for smaller bowls, not for
the butler’s great flagons.

Balin was most surprised, as you can imagine; but glad as he was to get out of his wearisome little
stone room, he wanted to stop and ask questions, and know what Bilbo was going to do, and all
about it.

If this is found out,
goodness knows where the king will put you next, with chains on your hands and feet too, I expect.

Don’t argue, there’s a good fellow!”

“We thought you had got some sensible notion, when you managed to get hold of the keys.

In the end, of course, they had to do just what
Bilbo suggested, because it was obviously impossible for them to try and find their way into the

upper halls, or to fight their way out of gates that closed by magic; and it was no good grumbling in
the passages until they were caught again.

The wine of Dorwinion brings deep and pleasant
dreams.

“That will save him some of the trouble he is in for,” said Mr. Baggins to himself.

We have got to
get busy very quick, if that is to happen!”

Before long, as Bilbo knew, some elves were under orders to
come down and help the butler get the empty barrels through the doors into the stream.

But among them were several others
which had been used for bringing other stuffs, butter, apples, and all sorts of things, to the king’s
palace.

In fact some were too
roomy, and as they climbed in the dwarves thought anxiously of the shaking and the bumping they
would get inside, though Bilbo did his best to find straw and other stuff to pack them in as cosily as
could be managed in a short time.

“Save us, Galion!” cried some, “you began your feasting early
and muddled your wits!

These are the ones to go and no others.

Down they go, down they bump!”

Most
likely you saw it some time ago and have been laughing at him; but I don’t suppose you would have
done half as well yourselves in his place.

For even
if he could have escaped through the upper gates at once, he had precious small chance of ever
finding the dwarves again.

Some had already gone to haul on the ropes which pulled up the
portcullis at the water-gate so as to let out the barrels as soon as they were all afloat below.

“Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know!

Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know!”

Then he saw that it
would have been no good even if he had managed to get astride his barrel, for there was no room to
spare, not even for a hobbit, between its top and the suddenly stooping roof where the gate was.

He managed to keep his head above the
water, but he was shivering with the cold, and he wondered if he would die of it before the luck
turned, and how much longer he would be able to hang on, and whether he should risk the chance of
letting go and trying to swim to the bank.

Luckily he was very
light, and the barrel was a good big one and being rather leaky had now shipped a small amount of
water.

He no longer thought twice about picking up a
supper uninvited if he got the chance, he had been obliged to do it for so long, and he knew only too
well what it was to be really hungry, not merely politely interested in the dainties of a well-filled
larder.

Of course helped by his magic ring he got on very well at first, but he was given away in the end by
his wet footsteps and the trail of drippings that he left wherever he went or sat; and also he began to
snivel, and wherever he tried to hide he was found out by the terrific explosions of his suppressed
sneezes.

The

rest of the night he had to pass wet as he was and far from a fire, but the bottle helped him to do
that, and he actually dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though the year was getting late and the
air was chilly.

Luckily there was no sun at the time to cast an awkward shadow, and for a mercy he did not sneeze
again for a good while.

Great floods and rains had
swollen the waters that flowed east; and there had been an earthquake or two (which some were
inclined to attribute to the dragon-alluding to him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod in the
direction of the Mountain).

Paths
had vanished, and many a rider and wanderer too, if they had tried to find the lost ways across.

So you see Bilbo had come in the end by the only road that was any good.

It might have been

some comfort to Mr. Baggins shivering on the barrels, if he had known that news of this had
reached Gandalf far away and given him great anxiety, and that he was in fact finishing his other
business (which does not come into this tale) and getting ready to come in search of Thorin’s
company.

All he knew was that the river seemed to go on and on and on for ever, and he was hungry,
and had a nasty cold in the nose, and did not like the way the Mountain seemed to frown at him and
threaten him as it drew ever nearer.

bridge made of wood ran out to where on
huge piles made of forest trees was built a busy wooden town, not a town of elves but of Men, who
still dared to dwell here under the shadow of the distant dragon-mountain.

They still throve on the
trade that came up the great river from the South and was carted past the falls to their town; but in
the great days of old, when Dale in the North was rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and
powerful, and there had been fleets of boats on the waters, and some were filled with gold and some
with warriors in armour, and there had been wars and deeds which were now only a legend.

But men remembered little of all that, though some still sang old songs of the dwarf-kings of
the Mountain, Thror and Thrain of the race of Durin, and of the coming of the Dragon, and the fall
of the lords of Dale.

Some sang too that Thror and Thrain would come back one day and gold
would flow in rivers through the mountain-gates, and all that land would be filled with new song
and new laughter.

Soon men would come up from the South and take some of the casks away, and others they
would fill with goods they had brought to be taken back up the stream to the Wood-elves’ home.

They would have been surprised, if they could have seen what happened down by the shore,
after they had gone and the shades of night had fallen.

He had a famished
and a savage look like a dog that has been chained and forgotten in a kennel for a week.

It was
Thorin, but you could only have told it by his golden chain, and by the colour of his now dirty and
tattered sky-blue hood with its tarnished silver tassel.

Perhaps he had forgotten that
he had had at least one good meal more than the dwarves, and also the use of his arms and legs, not
to speak of a greater allowance of air.

If you want food, and
if you want to go on with this silly adventure– it’s yours after all and not mine-you had better slap
your arms and rub your legs and try and help me get the others out while there is a chance!”

Thorin of course saw the sense of this, so after a few more groans he got up and helped the
hobbit as well as he could.

In the darkness floundering in the cold water they had a difficult and
very nasty job finding which were the right barrels.

They were unpacked and helped ashore where they sat or lay
muttering and moaning; they were so soaked and bruised and cramped that they could hardly yet
realize their release or be properly thankful for it.

Dwalin and Balin were two of the most unhappy,
and it was no good asking them to help.

With the willing help of Fili and Kili, Thorin and Bilbo at last discovered the remainder of the
company and got them out.

Poor fat Bombur was asleep or senseless; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and
Gloin were waterlogged and seemed only half alive; they all had to be carried one by one and laid
helpless on the shore.

Other folk were far away; and some of the younger people in the town
openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the mountain, and laughed at the greybeards and
gammers who said that they had seen him flying in the sky in their young days.

The gold gleamed on his neck and
waist: his eyes were dark and deep.

Some of the more foolish ran out of the hut as if they
expected the Mountain to go golden in the night and all the waters of the lake to turn yellow right
away.

This was a wide circle of quiet water
surrounded by the tall piles on which were built the greater houses, and by long wooden quays with
many steps and ladders going down to the surface of the lake.

Pressing forward before the Master’s table they cried:
“These are prisoners of our king that have escaped, wandering vagabond dwarves that could
not give any good account of themselves, sneaking through the woods and molesting our people!”
“Is this true?” asked the Master.

The Elvenking was very powerful
in those parts and the Master wished for no enmity with him, nor did he think much of old songs,
giving his mind to.trade and tolls, to cargoes and gold, to which habit he owed his position.

His crown shall be upholden,
His harp shall be restrung,
His halls shall echo golden
To songs of yore re-sung.

The woods shall wave on mountains
And grass beneath the sun;
His wealth shall flow in fountains
And the rivers golden run.

Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them were quite new and spoke confidently of
the sudden death of the dragon and of cargoes of rich presents coming down the river to Lake-town.

Then, as he had said, the dwarves’ good feeling towards the little hobbit grew stronger every
day.

He had not forgotten the look of the Mountain, nor the thought of the dragon, and he had
besides a shocking cold.

For three days he sneezed and coughed, and he could not go out, and even
after that his speeches at banquets were limited to “Thag you very buch.”

In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up the Forest River with their cargoes, and
there was great excitement in the king’s palace.

He at any rate did not believe in dwarves fighting and killing dragons like Smaug, and he strongly
suspected attempted burglary or something like it which shows he was a wise elf and wiser than the
men of the town, though not quite right, as we shall see in the end.

He sent out his spies about the
shores of the lake and as far northward towards the Mountains as they would go, and waited.

While the enthusiasm still lasted in the town
was the time to get help.

So he spoke to the
Master and his councillors and said that soon he and his company must go on towards the
Mountain.

But the Master was not sorry at all to let them go.

“Let them go and bother Smaug, and see how he welcomes them!”

What help we can offer shall be yours, and we trust to your gratitude when your
kingdom is regained.”

In two days going they rowed right up the Long Lake and passed out into the River Running,
and now they could all see the Lonely Mountain towering grim and tall before them.

The stream
was strong and their going slow.

It was easier to believe in the Dragon
and less easy to believe in Thorin in these wild parts.

They were come to the Desolation of the Dragon, and they were come at the waning of
the year.

They reached the skirts of the Mountain all the same without meeting any danger or any sign
of the Dragon other than the wilderness he had made about his lair.

Before setting out to search the
western spurs of the Mountain for the hidden door, on which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a
scouting expedition to spy out the land to the South where the Front Gate stood.

He
looked both sad and grim as he said this: he had been one of Thorin’s companions on the day the
Dragon came.

Nothing

moved in the waste, save the vapour and the water, and every now and again a black and ominous
crow.

“We can do no good here!–

And I don’t like these
dark birds, they look like spies of evil.”
“The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the Mountain then-or I imagine so from the
smoke,” said the hobbit.

But he might be
gone away some time, or he might be lying out on the mountain-side keeping watch, and still I
expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: all the halls within must be filled with his
foul reek.”

Only in June they had been guests in the fair house of Elrond,
and though autumn was now crawling towards winter that pleasant time now seemed years ago.

They were alone in the perilous waste without hope of further help.

They were at the end of their
journey, but as far as ever, it seemed, from the end of their quest.

It
was he that made the dwarves begin the dangerous search on the western slopes for the secret door.

On this western side there were fewer signs of the dragon’s marauding feet, and there was
some grass for their ponies.

From this western camp, shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the
sun began to sink towards the forest, day by day they toiled in parties searching for paths up the
mountain-side.

About
midday, creeping behind a great stone that stood alone like a pillar, Bilbo came on what looked like
rough steps going upwards.

Along this they could carry no bundles or packs, so narrow and
breathless was it, with a fall of a hundred and fifty feet beside them on to sharp rocks below; but
each of them took a good coil of rope wound tight about his waist, and so at last without mishap
they reached the little grassy bay.

Mining work, they saw clearly was no good against the magic that had shut this door; and they
grew terrified, too, of the echoing noise.

Bilbo found sitting on the doorstep lonesome and
wearisome-there was not a doorstep, of course, really, but they used to call the little grassy space
between the wall and the opening the “doorstep” in fun, remembering Bilbo’s words long ago at the
unexpected party in his hobbit-hole, when he said they could sit on the doorstep till they thought of
something.

Their spirits had risen a little at the discovery of the path, but now they sank into their
boots; and yet they would not give it up and go away.

Since he has got an invisible ring, and ought to be a specially excellent performer now, I am
beginning to think he might go through the Front Gate and spy things out a bit!”

Bilbo heard this-the dwarves were on the rocks just : above the enclosure where he was
sitting-and “Good Gracious!”

Whatever am I going to do?

The gleam went out, the sun sank, the moon was gone, and
evening sprang into the sky.

Chapter 12
Inside Information
For a long time the dwarves stood in the dark before the door and debated, until at last Thorin
spoke:
“Now is the time for our esteemed Mr. Baggins, who has proved himself a good companion
on our long road, and a hobbit full of courage and resource far exceeding his size, and if I may say
so possessed of good luck far exceeding the usual allowance-now is the time for him to perform the
service for which he was included in our Company; now is the time for him to earn his Reward.”

You are familiar with Thorin’s style on important occasions, so I will not give you any more of it,
though he went on a good deal longer than this.

“If you mean you think it is my job to go into the secret passage first, O Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, may your beard grow ever longer,” he said crossly, “say so at once and have done!

I have got you out of two messes already, which were hardly in the original bargain,
so that I am, I think, already owed some reward.

Perhaps I have begun to trust my luck more than I
used to in the old days” – he meant last spring before he left his own house, but it seemed centuries
ago – “but anyway I think I will go and have a peep at once and get it over.

He said he would come inside at least and

perhaps a bit of the way too, really to call for help if necessary.

The most that can be said for the dwarves is this: they intended to pay Bilbo really
handsomely for his services; they had brought him to do a nasty job for them, and they did not mind
the poor little fellow doing it if he would; but they would all have done their best to get him out of
trouble, if he got into it, as they did in the case of the trolls at the beginning of their adventures
before they had any particular reasons for being grateful to him.

It was far easier going than he expected.

This was no goblin entrance, or rough wood-elves’ cave.

It was a passage made by dwarves, at the
height of their wealth and skill: straight as a ruler, smooth-floored and smooth-sided, going with a
gentle never-varying slope direct-to some distant end in the blackness below.

After a while Balin bade Bilbo “Good luck!” and stopped where he could still see the faint
outline of the door, and by a trick of, the echoes of the tunnel hear the rustle of the whispering
voices of the others just outside.

Already he was a very
different hobbit from the one that had run out without a pocket-handkerchief from Bag-End long
ago.

“You went and put your foot
right in it that night of the party, and now you have got to pull it out and pay for it!

“I have absolutely no use for dragon-guarded
treasures, and the whole lot could stay here for ever, if only I could wake up and find this beastly
tunnel was my own front-hall at home!”

Going on from there was the bravest thing he ever did.

At any rate after a
short halt go on he did; and you can picture him coming to the end of the tunnel, an opening of
much the same size and shape as the door above.

There he lay, a vast red-golden dragon,
fast asleep; thrumming came from his jaws and nostrils, and wisps of smoke, but his fires were low
in slumber.

Beneath him, under all his limbs and his huge coiled tail, and about him on all sides stretching
away across the unseen floors, lay countless piles of precious things, gold wrought and unwrought,
gems and jewels, and silver red-stained in the ruddy light.

Smaug lay, with wings folded like an immeasurable bat, turned partly on one side, so that the
hobbit could see his underparts and his long pale belly crusted with gems and fragments of gold
from his long lying on his costly bed.

Bilbo had heard
tell and sing of dragon-hoards before, but the splendour, the lust, the glory of such treasure had
never yet come home to him.

His heart was filled and pierced with enchantment and with the desire
of dwarves; and he gazed motionless, almost forgetting the frightful guardian, at the gold beyond
price and count.

Above him
the sleeping dragon lay, a dire menace even in his sleep.

But the dragon did not wake-not yet but shifted into other dreams of greed
and violence, lying there in his stolen hall while the little hobbit toiled back up the long tunnel.

His
heart was beating and a more fevered shaking was in his legs than when he was going down, but
still he clutched the cup, and his chief thought was: “I’ve done it!

Then the dwarves forgot their joy and their confident boasts of a moment before and cowered
down in fright.

It does not do to leave a live dragon out of
your calculations, if you live near him.

Dragons may not have much real use for all their wealth, but
they know it to an ounce as a rule, especially after long possession; and Smaug was no exception.

The dwarves heard the awful rumour of his flight, and they crouched against the walls
of the grassy terrace cringing under boulders, hoping somehow to escape the frightful eyes of the
hunting dragon.

It’s no good here.”

Bombur and Bofur – we
have forgotten them, they are down in the valley!”

Get inside Mr.
Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili-the dragon shan’t have all of us.

The horrible sounds of Smaug’s anger were echoing in the stony hollows far above; at any moment
he might come blazing down or fly whirling round and find them there, near the perilous cliff’s
edge hauling madly on the ropes.

The dragon came.

The dragon
swooped and turned to pursue them, and was gone.

Every
now and again through the night they could hear the roar of the flying dragon grow and then pass
and fade, as he hunted round and round the mountain-sides.

He guessed from the ponies, and from the traces of the camps he had discovered, that men had
come up from the river and the lake and had scaled the mountain-side from the valley where the
ponies had been standing; but the door withstood his searching eye, and the little high-walled bay
had kept out his fiercest flames.

Long he had hunted in vain till the dawn chilled his wrath and he
went back to his golden couch to sleep – and to gather new strength.

They realized that dangers of this
kind were inevitable in dealing with such a guardian, and that it was no good giving up their quest
yet.

Luckily they had saved enough of their stores to last them still for some
time.

Then as is the nature of folk that are thoroughly perplexed, they began to grumble at the hobbit,
blaming him for what had at first so pleased them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up Smaug’s
wrath so soon.

“I was not engaged to kill
dragons, that is warrior’s work, but to steal treasure.

I should want hundreds of years to bring it all up, if I was fifty
times as big, and Smaug as tame as a rabbit.”

Getting rid of dragons is not at all in my line, but I will do my best to think about it.

Perhaps before long one or two could be chosen to go back to the
store by the river and replenish our supplies.

I have got my ring and will creep down this very noon -then

When midday came he got ready for another journey down into the Mountain.

Had he known more about dragons and their wily ways, he might have teen more frightened and
less hopeful of catching this one napping.

So silent
was his going that smoke on a gentle wind could hardly have surpasses it, and he was inclined to
feel a bit proud of himself as he drew near the lower door.

He had forgotten or had never heard about dragons’ sense of smell.

Help yourself
again, there is plenty and to spare!”

But Bilbo was not quite so unlearned in dragon-lore as all that,
and if Smaug hoped to get him to come nearer so easily he was disappointed.

“Do you now?” said the dragon somewhat flattered, even though he did not believe a word of
it.

You have nice manners for a thief and a liar,” said the dragon.

“I am the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the stinging fly.

“Lovely titles!” sneered the dragon.

This of course is the way to talk to dragons, if you don’t want to reveal your proper name
(which is wise), and don’t want to infuriate them by a flat refusal (which is also very wise).

No
dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk and of wasting time trying to understand it.

In return for the excellent meal I will give you one piece of advice
for your good: don’t have more to do with dwarves than you can help!”
“Dwarves!” said Bilbo in pretended surprise.

You’ll come to a bad end, if you go with
such friends.

I don’t mind if you go back and tell them so from me.”

“I suppose you got a fair price for that cup last night?”

In fact he was in grievous danger of coming
under the dragon-spell.

“Not gold alone brought us hither.”
“Ha! Ha!

I am pleased to hear that you had other business in these parts besides my
gold.

“I don’t know if it has occurred to you that, even if you could steal the gold bit by bit-a matter
of a hundred years or so – you could not get it very far?

So far all his. thoughts
and energies had been concentrated on getting to the Mountain and finding the entrance.

Now a nasty
suspicion began to grow in his mind-had the dwarves forgotten this important point too, or were
they laughing in their sleeves at him all the time?

That is the effect that dragon-talk has on the
inexperienced.

“I tell you,” he said, in an effort to remain loyal to his friends and to keep his end up, “that
gold was only an afterthought with us.

“I have always understood,” said Bilbo in a frightened squeak, “that dragons were softer
underneath, especially in the region of the-er-chest; but doubtless one so fortified has thought of
that.”

The dragon stopped short in his boasting.

The dragon rolled over.

It was an unfortunate remark, for the dragon spouted terrific flames after him, and fast though
he sped up the slope, he had not gone nearly far enough to be comfortable before the ghastly head
of Smaug was thrust against the opening behind.

“Never laugh at live dragons, Bilbo you fool!”

In the meanwhile his friends did their best to
cheer him up; and they were eager for his story, especially wanting to know why the dragon had
made such an awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped.

On thinking things over he was now regretting some of the things he had said to the dragon,
and was not eager to repeat them.

“The thrushes are good and friendly-this is a very old bird
indeed, and is maybe the last left of the ancient breed that used to live about here, tame to the hands
of my father and grandfather.

They were a long-lived and magical race, and this might even be one
of those that were alive then, a couple of hundreds years or more ago.

So Bilbo told them all he could remember, and he confessed that he had a nasty feeling that
the dragon guessed too much from his riddles added to the camps and the ponies.

“I am sure he
knows we came from Lake-town and had help from there; and I have a horrible feeling that his next
move may be in that direction.

I wish to goodness I had never said that about Barrel-rider; it would
make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-men.”

It cannot be helped,
and it is difficult not to slip in talking to a dragon, or so I have always heard,” said Balin anxious to
comfort him.

“I think you did very well, if you ask me-you found out one very useful thing at any
rate, and got home alive, and that is more than most can say who have had words with the likes of
Smaug.

That turned the conversation, and they all began discussing dragon-slayings historical,
dubious, and mythical, and the various sorts of stabs and jabs and undercuts, and the different arts,
devices and stratagems by which they had been accomplished.

The general opinion was that
catching a dragon napping was not as easy as it sounded, and the attempt to stick one or prod one
asleep was more likely to end in disaster than a bold frontal attack.

The dragon has withered all the pleasant green, and
anyway the night has come and it is cold.

He has not, or we should have heard him.”
“I don’t know, I don’t know-because at first he wanted to try and lure me in again, I suppose,
and now perhaps because he is waiting till after tonight’s hunt, or because he does not want to
damage his bedroom if he can help it – but I wish you would not argue.

He seemed so
much in earnest that the dwarves at last did as he said, though they delayed shutting the door-it
seemed a desperate plan, for no one knew whether or how they could get it open again from the
inside, and the thought of being shut in a place from which the only way out led through the
dragon’s lair was not one they liked.

The talk turned to the dragon’s wicked words about the dwarves.

They wondered if they were still lying there.unharmed in the hall below: the spears
that were made for the armies of the great King Bladorthin (long since dead), each had a
thrice-forged head and their shafts were inlaid with cunning gold, but they were never delivered or
paid for; shields made for warriors long dead; the great golden cup of Thror, two-handed,

hammered and carven with birds and flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels; coats of mail
gilded and silvered and impenetrable; the necklace of Girion, Lord of Dale, made of five hundred
emeralds green as grass, which he gave for the arming of his eldest son in a coat of dwarf-linked
rings the like of which had never been made before, for it was wrought of pure silver to the power
and strength of triple steel.

“I
fear that dragon in my marrow.

They had hardly gone any distance down the tunnel when a blow
smote the side of the Mountain like the crash of battering-rams made of forest oaks and swung by
giants.

This was the outburst of his wrath when he could find nobody and see nothing, even where he
guessed the outlet must actually be.

I don’t know your smell, but if you are not one of those men
of the Lake, you had their help.

If they dozed, they woke still to
darkness and to silence going on unbroken.

They
would almost have welcomed sounds from below of the dragon’s return.

So several of the dwarves got up and groped back to where the door had been.

But somehow, just when
the dwarves were most despairing, Bilbo felt a strange lightening of the heart, as if a heavy weight
had gone from under his waistcoat.

I am going down the tunnel once again.

I have been that way twice, when I knew
there was a dragon at the other end, so I will risk a third visit when I am no longer sure.

In desperation they
agreed, and Thorin was the first go forward by Bilbo’s side.

But certainly it was not a spark of dragon-fire, though the wormstench was heavy in the
place, and the taste of vapour was on his tongue.

Bilbo got up, and found that
he did not know in what direction to turn.

they hissed, when they heard his voice: and though that helped the hobbit to find out
where they were, was some time before he could get anything else out of them.

Every now and again, while he was still near enough, they caught a glint and a tinkle as he stumbled
on some golden thing.

The great jewel shone before he
feet of its own inner light, and yet, cut and fashioned by the dwarves, who had dug it from the heart
of the mountain long ago, it took all light that fell upon it and-changes it into ten thousand sparks of
white radiance shot with glints of the rainbow.

He peeped timidly through and caught a glimpse of
great passages and of the dim beginnings of wide stairs going up into the gloom.

He was just going to turn and go back, when a black shape swooped
at him and brushed his face.

“The light’s gone out!

Someone come and find and help me!”

Faintly the dwarves heard his small cries, though the only word they could catch was ‘help!’

“Certainly not the dragon, or he
would not go on squeaking.”

They waited a moment or two, and still there were no dragon-noises, no sound at all in fact
but Bilbo’s distant voice.

“It seems
we have got to go and help our burglar.”

“It is about our turn to help,” said Balin, “and I am quite willing to go.

he said in answer to their questions.

The
mere fleeting glimpses of treasure which they had caught as they went along had rekindled all the
fire of their dwarvish hearts; and when the heart of a dwarf, even the most respectable, is wakened
by gold and by jewels, he grows suddenly bold, and he may become fierce.

Each now gripped a lighted torch; and as they gazed, first on one side and then on another, they
forgot fear and even caution.

Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood, and finding still hanging there many golden harps strung
with silver they took them and struck them; and being magical (and also untouched by the dragon,
who had small interests in music)

Thorin
was not least among these; but always he searched from side to side for something which he could
not find.

Royal
indeed did Thorin look, clad in a coat of gold-plated rings, with a silver hafted axe in a belt crusted
with scarlet stones.

With that he put on Bilbo a small coat of mail, wrought for some young elf-prince long ago.

A light
helm of figured leather, strengthened beneath with hoops of steel, and studded about the bring with
white gems, was set upon the hobbit’s head.

Long before the dwarves were tired of examining the treasures he became wary of it
and sat down on the floor; and he began to wonder nervously what the end of it all would be “I
would give a good many of these precious goblets, thought, “for a drink of something cheering out
of one Beorn’s wooden bowls!”

We are armed, but what
good has any armour ever been before against Smaug the Dreadful?

We are not looking for gold yet, but for a way of escape; and we have tempted luck too long!”
‘”You speak the truth!”

“Let us go!

Their glittering mail they had covered again with their old cloaks and their bright helms with
their tattered hoods, and one by one they walked behind Thorin, a line of little lights in the darkness
that halted often, listening in fear once more for any rumour of the dragon’s coming.

Though all the
old adornments were long mouldered or destroyed, and though all was befouled and blasted with
the comings and goings of the monster, Thorin knew every passage and every turn.

The steps were not made, all the same, for hobbit-legs, and Bilbo
was just feeling that he could go on no longer, when suddenly the roof sprang high and far beyond
the reach of their torch-light.

Skulls and bones were upon the floor among flagons
and bowls and broken drinking-horns and dust.

A misty sun sent its pale light between the arms of the Mountain, and beams of gold

fell on the pavement at the threshold.

A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by their smoking torches flurried over them; as they
sprang forward their feet slithered on stones rubbed smooth and slimed by the passing of the
dragon.

After their long time in
the stewing depths of the dragon-haunted caverns, they shivered in the sun.

Do let’s go somewhere where we can sit quiet
for a bit!”

“And I think I know which way we should go: we ought to
make for the old look-out post at the Southwest corner of the Mountain.”

It will be rough going.

As a matter of fact two nights and the day between had gone by (and not altogether without
food) since the dragon smashed the magic door, but Bilbo had quite lost count, and it might have
been one night or a week of nights for all he could tell.

I would give a good breakfast to know.

A
dragon would always be hungry in such parts.”

After going a short way they struck the old
road, and before long came to a deep dell sheltered among the rocks; there they rested for a while
and had such a breakfast as they could, chiefly cram and water.

(If you want to know what cram is, I
can only say that I don’t know the recipe; but it is biscuitish, keeps good indefinitely, is supposed to
be sustaining, and is certainly not entertaining, being in fact very uninteresting except as a chewing
exercise.

It scrambled steeply up, and they plodded slowly one behind the other, till at last in the late

afternoon they came to the top of the ridge and saw the wintry sun going downwards to the West.

But there seemed small need for watching in the days of
our prosperity, and the guards were made over comfortable, perhaps – otherwise we might have had
longer warnings of the coming of the dragon, and things might have been different.

“We can go no further to-day.”
“Hear, hear!” cried Bilbo, and flung himself on the ground.

and there was nothing, and East there was nothing, and in the
South there was no sign of the dragon, but there was a gathering of very many birds.

Chapter 14
Fire and Water
Now if you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news of Smaug, you must go back again to the
evening when he smashed the door and flew off in rage, two days before.

Now it was lost and gone, blotted in the dark.

“Perhaps the King under the Mountain is forging gold,” said another.

“As like as not it is the marauding fire of the
Dragon, the only king under the Mountain we have ever known.”
“You are always foreboding gloomy things!” said the others.

Then suddenly a great light appeared in the low place
in the hills and the northern end of the lake turned golden.

“His wealth is like the Sun, his silver like a
fountain, his rivers golden run!

The river is running gold from the Mountain!”

“The dragon is coming or I am a fool!”

So it was that the dragon did not find them quite

unprepared.

Before long, so great was his speed, they could see him as a spark of fire rushing
towards them and growing ever huger and more bright, and not the most foolish doubted that the
prophecies had gone rather wrong.

The bridge was gone, and his enemies were on an island
in deep water-too deep and dark and cool for his liking.

At the twanging of the bows
and the shrilling of the trumpets the dragon’s wrath blazed to its height, till he was blind and mad
with it.

Fire leaped from the dragon’s jaws.

Back swirled the dragon.

There was mourning and weeping, where but a little
time ago the old songs of mirth to come had been sung about the dwarves.

The Master himself was turning to his great gilded boat, hoping to row away in the
confusion and save himself.

That was the dragon’s hope.

He was a
descendant in long line of Girion, Lord of Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down the
Running River from the ruin long ago.

The dragon was
circling back, flying low, and as he came the moon rose above the eastern shore and silvered his
great wings.

I have saved you to the last.

If ever you came
from the forges of the true king under the Mountain, go now and speed well!”

The dragon swooped once more lower than ever, and as he turned and dived down his belly
glittered white with sparkling fires of gems in the moon-but not in one place.

Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark on the surface of the lake, and
down the wind came the voices of the people of Esgaroth lamenting their lost town and goods and
ruined houses.

But they had really much to be thankful for, had they thought of it, though it could
hardly be expected that they should just then: three quarters of the people of the town had at least
escaped alive; their woods and fields and pastures and cattle and most of their boats remained
undamaged; and the dragon was dead.

“He may have a good head for business-especially his own business,” some murmured,
“but he is no good when anything serious happens!”

Bard
the Dragon-shooter of the line of Girion!

I am Bard,
of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!”

Let ‘King Bard’ go back to his own kingdom-Dale is now freed by his valour, and nothing binders
his return.

And any that wish can go with him, if they prefer the cold shores under the shadow of the
Mountain to the green shores of the lake.

Who aroused the dragon from his slumber, I might ask?

Who obtained of us rich gifts
and ample help, and led us to believe that old songs could come true?

What sort of gold have they sent down the river to reward us?

Dragon-fire
and ruin!

From whom should we claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and
orphans?”
As you see, the Master had not got his position for nothing.

The result of his words was that
for the moment the people quite forgot their idea of a new king, and turned their angry thoughts
towards Thorin and his company.

Wild and bitter words were shouted from many sides; and some of
those who had before sung the old songs loudest, were now heard as loudly crying that the dwarves

had stirred the dragon up against them deliberately!

He thought of the Master’s
words, and of Dale rebuilt, and filled with golden bells, if he could but find the men.

I serve you still-though after a while I may think
again of your words and go North with any that will follow me.”

Then he strode off to help in the ordering of the camps and in the care of the sick and the
wounded.

He
thought much but said little, unless it was to call loudly for men to bring him fire and food.

Meanwhile Bard took the lead, and ordered things as he wished, though always in the
Master’s name, and he had a hard task to govern the people and direct the preparations for their
protection and housing.

Probably most of them would have perished in the winter that now hurried
after autumn, if help had not been to hand.

But help came swiftly; for Bard at once had speedy
messengers sent up the river to the Forest to ask the aid of the King of the Elves of the Wood, and
these messengers had found a host already on the move, although it was then only the third day
after the fall of Smaug.

Very great indeed was the
commotion among all things with wings that dwelt on the borders of the Desolation of the Dragon.

Even before the
Elvenking rode forth the news had passed west right to the pinewoods of the Misty Mountains;
Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the goblins were at council in their caves.

It is an ill wind, all the same,” he added, “that blows
no one any good.”

For he too had not forgotten the legend of the wealth of Thror.

But the king, when he received the prayers of Bard, had pity, for he was
the lord of a good and kindly people; so turning his march, which had at first been direct towards
the Mountain, he hastened now down the river to the Long Lake.

He had not boats or rafts enough
for his host, and they were forced to go the slower way by foot; but great store of goods he sent
ahead by water.

Still elves are light-footed, and though they were not in these days much used to the
marches and the treacherous lands between the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift.

Only five
days after the death of the dragon they came upon the shores and looked on the ruins of the town.

Their welcome was good, as may be expected, and the men and their Master were ready to make
any bargain for the future in return for the Elvenking’s aid.

They removed northward higher up the shore; for ever after they had a dread

of the water where the dragon lay.

He would never again return to his golden bed, but was stretched
cold as stone, twisted upon the floor of the shallows.

But all the men of arms who were still able, and the most of the Elvenking’s array, got
ready to march north to the Mountain.

“The time has gone for the autumn
wanderings; and these are birds that dwell always in the land; there are starlings and flocks of
finches; and far off there are many carrion birds as if a battle were afoot!”

Most of my people are
abroad, for there are great tidings in the South – some are tidings of joy to you, and some you will
not think so good.

the birds are gathering back again to the Mountain and to Dale from

South and East and West, for word has gone out that Smaug is dead!”

It was some time before Thorin could bring the dwarves to be silent and listen
to the raven’s news.

You may go back to your halls in safety; all the
treasure is yours-for the moment.

The news of the
death of the guardian has already gone far and wide, and the legend of the wealth of Thror has not
lost in the telling during many years; many are eager for a share of the spoil.

They too think to find amends from your treasure, whether you are
alive or dead.

If you will listen to my counsel, you will not
trust the Master of the Lake-men, but rather him that shot the dragon with his bow.

We would see peace once more
among dwarves and men and elves after the long desolation; but it may cost you dear in gold.

You and your people shall not
be forgotten.

But none of our gold shall thieves take or the violent carry off while we are alive.

If
you would earn our thanks still more, bring us news of any that draw near.

But go specially
to my cousin Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well-armed, and dwells nearest to this
place.

“I will not say if this counsel be good or bad,” croaked Rac; “but I will do
what can be done.”

In any case he felt that
the adventure was, properly speaking, over.with the death of the dragon-in which he was much
mistaken-and he would have given most of his share of the profits for the peaceful winding up of
these affairs.

“Back to the Mountain!” cried the dwarves as if they had not heard him, so back he
had to go with them.

They explored the caverns once more, and found, as they expected,
that only the Front Gate remained open; all the other gates (except, of course, the small secret door)
had long ago been broken and blocked by Smaug, and no sign of them remained.

So while the others went on with
their work, Fili and Kili were sent, guided by a raven, to find the ponies and bring back all they
could.

They were four days gone, and by that time they knew that the joined armies of the Lake-men
and the Elves were hurrying towards the Mountain.

Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark
fortress and to go down and join in the mirth and feasting by the fires.

The heart is bold that looks on gold;

On silver necklaces they strung
The light of stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, from twisted wire
The melody of harps they wrung.

Here at the Gates the king awaits,
His hands are rich with gems and gold.

We came expecting to find none living here; yet now
that we are met there is matter for a parley and a council.”

“Who are you, and of what would you parley?”
“I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon slain and your treasure delivered.

He did not, of course, expect that any one
would remember that it was he who discovered all by himself the dragon’s weak spot; and that was
just as well, for no one ever did.

But also he did not reckon with the power that gold has upon
which a dragon has long brooded, nor with dwarvish hearts.

The price of the goods and the assistance that
we received of the Lake-men we will fairly pay-in due time.

“A just question,” replied Bard.

Begone now

At the least he shall deliver one twelfth portion of the
treasure unto Bard, as the dragon-slayer, and as the heir of Girion.

We will bear no weapons
against you, but we leave you to your gold.

So
grim had Thorin become, that even if they had wished, the others would not have dared to find fault
with him; but indeed most of them seemed to share his mind-except perhaps old fat Bombur and
Fili and Kili.

“The whole place still stinks of dragon,” he grumbled to himself, “and it makes me sick.

“For the Arkenstone of my father,” he said, “is worth more than a river of
gold in itself, and to me it is beyond price.

That stone of all the treasure I name unto myself, and I
will be avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds it.”
Bilbo heard these words and he grew afraid, wondering what would happen, if the stone was
found-wrapped in an old bundle of tattered oddments that he used as a pillow.

Things had gone on like this for some time, when the ravens brought news that
Dain and more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from the Iron Hills, were now within about two
days’ march of Dale, coming from the North-East.

I do not call this counsel good.

How shall you be fed without the
friendship and goodwill of the lands about you?

The treasure is likely to be your death, though the
dragon is no more!”’

“Winter and snow will bite both men and elves,” he said, “and
they may find their dwelling in the Waste grievous to bear.

I would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes.”

“I would give a good deal for
the feel of a strong drink in my throat, and for a soft bed after a good supper!”
“I can’t give you those, while the siege is going on.

“You are a good fellow, Mr. Baggins, and I will take your offer kindly.

“Off you go!” said Bilbo.

As soon as Bombur had gone, Bilbo put on his ring, fastened his rope, slipped down
over the wall, and was gone.

He had barely scrambled out on
the far bank, shivering and spluttering, when up came elves in the gloom with bright lanterns and
searched for the cause of the noise.

They will help him more than us, if it is that queer little creature that is said to be their
servant.”

“Whatever it is, it’s my own, my good
elves.

I assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of gold and
starve, as long as you sit here.”

You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?”
“We have, a long time ago; but what has he got to do with us?” asked the king.

I see I have some information you have not got.

Dain, I may tell you, is
now less than two days’ march off, and has at least five hundred grim dwarves with him – a good
many of them have had experience in the dreadful dwarf and goblin wars, of which you have no
doubt heard.

He values it above a river of gold.

Anyway I am
going back now, and the dwarves can do what they like to me.

I hope you will find it useful.”

“But I don’t think I ought to leave
my friends like this, after all we have gone through together.

Really I must be going, and quickly.”

But there was no time for all the questions that he immediately wished to ask.

“All in
good time!” said Gandalf.

Good night!”

“They will have got wind of his coming.

“Did you come to ask me idle questions?

“Is
there then nothing for which you would yield any of your gold?”

But wonder overcame him and
he added: “But how came you by the heirloom of my house-if there is need to ask such a question
of thieves?”

Thorin?
Take it that I have disposed of my share as I wished, and let it go at that!”

“And I will let you go at that-and may we never meet again!”

For it I will give one fourteenth share of the hoard in
silver and gold, setting aside the gems; but that shall be accounted the promised share of this traitor,
and with that reward he shall depart, and you can divide it as you will.

Take him, if you wish him to live; and no friendship of mine goes with him.

“What about the gold and silver?” asked Bilbo.

And already, so strong was the bewilderment of the treasure
upon him, he was pondering whether by the help of Dain he might not recapture the Arkenstone and
withhold the share of the reward.

More than one of the dwarves ‘in their
hearts felt shame and pity at his going.

“You have mail upon you, which was made by my folk, and is too
good for you.

If
that is done without deceit, then we will depart, and the elf-host will go back to the Forest.

“We are sent from Dain son of Nain,” they said when questioned.

We are going
on, so make way or we shall fight you!”

Bard, of course, refused to allow the dwarves to go straight on to the Mountain.

He was
determined to wait until the gold and silver had been brought out in exchange for the Arkenstone:
for he did not believe that this would be done, if once the fortress was manned with so large and
warlike a company.

Bard then sent messengers at once to the Gate;
but they found no gold or payment.

Dwarf-mail may be good, but they
will soon be hard put to it.

I begin this war for gold.

Let us hope still for something that will
bring reconciliation.

The Goblins are upon you!

Upon one side were the Goblins and the wild Wolves, and upon the other were
Elves and Men and Dwarves.

Ever since the fall of the Great Goblin of the
Misty Mountains the hatred of their race for the dwarves had been rekindled to fury.

Then they marched and gathered by hill and valley, going ever
by tunnel or under dark, until around and beneath the great mountain Gundabad of the North, where
was their capital, a vast host was assembled ready to sweep down in time of storm unawares upon
the South.

This is the plan that he made in council with the Elvenking and with Bard; and with Dain, for
the dwarf-lord now joined them: the Goblins were the foes of all, and at their coming all other
quarrels were forgotten.

Their only hope was to lure the goblins into the valley between the arms of
the Mountain; and themselves to man the great spurs that struck south and east.

Yet this would be
perilous, if the goblins were in sufficient numbers to overrun the Mountain itself, and so attack them
also from behind and above; but there was no time for make any other plan, or to summon any help.

As Gandalf had hoped, the
goblin army had gathered behind the resisted vanguard, and poured now in rage into the valley,
driving wildly up between the arms of the Mountain, seeking for the foe.

A magic ring of that sort
is not a complete protection in a goblin charge, nor does it stop flying arrows and wild spears; but it
does help in getting out of the way, and it prevents your head from being specially chosen for a
sweeping stroke by a goblin swordsman.

Their hatred for the goblins is cold and bitter.

The rocks were stained black
with goblin blood.

Just as the goblins were recovering from the onslaught and the elf-charge was
halted, there rose from across the valley a deep-throated roar.

Panic came upon the Goblins; and even as
they turned to meet this new attack, the elves charged again with renewed numbers.

Already many
of the goblins were flying back down the river to escape from the trap: and many of their own
wolves were turning upon them and rending the dead and the wounded.

Goblins had scaled the Mountain from the other side and
already many were on the slopes above the Gate, and others were streaming down recklessly,
heedless of those that fell screaming from cliff and precipice, to attack the spurs from above.

The goblins gathered again in the valley.

There a host of
Wargs came ravening and with them came the bodyguard of Bolg, goblins of huge size with
scimitars of steel.

They had forgotten Thorin!

Hood and cloak were gone; they were in shining
armour, and red light leapt from their eyes.

In the gloom the great dwarf gleamed like gold in a
dying fire.

Rocks were buried down from on high by the goblins above; but they held on.

Down, heedless of order, rushed all the dwarves of Dain to his help.

Once again the goblins were stricken in the valley; and they were piled in
heaps till Dale was dark and hideous with their corpses.

Already behind him
among the goblin dead lay many men and many dwarves, and many a fair elf that should have lived
yet long ages merrily in the wood.

Soon the attackers were attacked, and they were
forced into a great ring, facing every way, hemmed all about with goblins and wolves returning to
the assault.

Their friends could not help them, for the assault from the Mountain was
renewed with redoubled force, and upon either side men and elves were being slowly beaten down.

He had taken his stand on Ravenhill among the
Elves-partly because there was more chance of escape from that point, and partly (with the more
Tookish part of his mind) because if he was going to be in a last desperate stand, he preferred on the
whole to defend the Elvenking.

“It will not be long now,” thought Bilbo, “before the goblins win the Gate, and we are all
slaughtered or driven down and captured.

Really it is enough to make one weep, after all one has
gone through.

Looking into the valley he could see no living goblins.

Surely there was a camp still in the plain some distance off; and there was a coming and going
about the Gate?

“Farewell, good thief,” he said.

“I go now to the halls of waiting to sit beside my fathers, until
the world is renewed.

Since I leave now all gold and silver, and go where it is of little worth, I wish
to part in friendship from you, and I would take back my words and deeds at the Gate.”

“This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and not a mountain of gold
can amend it.

“There is more in you of good than you know, child of the kindly West.

If more of us valued food and cheer and song
above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world.

The
Eagles had long had suspicion of the goblins’ mustering; from their watchfulness the movements in
the mountains could not be altogether hid.

They it was who dislodged the goblins from the mountain -slopes,
casting them over precipices, or driving them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes.

It
was not long before they had freed the Lonely Mountain, and elves and men on either side of the
valley could come at last to the help of the battle below.

The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he
tossed wolves and goblins from his path like straws and feathers.

Then dismay fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions.

Songs
have said that three parts of the goblin warriors of the North perished on that day, and the mountains
had peace for many a year.

Victory had been assured before the fall of night, but the pursuit was still on foot, when Bilbo
returned to the camp; and not many were in the valley save the more grievously wounded.

“Some are in the hunt,” said the wizard, “but most have gone back to their eyries.

Dain has crowned their chief with gold,
and sworn friendship with them for ever.”

I suppose I shall be going home soon?”
“As soon as you like,” said the wizard.

“May it bring good fortune to all his folk that
dwell here after!”

There was, of course, no longer any question
of dividing the hoard in such shares as had been planned, to Balin and Dwalin, and Dori and Nori
and Ori, and Oin and Gloin, and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur-or to Bilbo.

Yet a fourteenth share of
all the silver and gold, wrought and unwrought, was given up to Bard; for Dain said: “We will
honour the agreement of the dead, and he has now the Arkenstone in his keeping.”

From that treasure Bard sent much gold to the Master of Lake-town; and he rewarded his followers
and friends freely.

How on earth should I have got
all that treasure home without war and murder all along the way, I don’t know.

And I don’t know
what I should have done with it when I got home.

In the end he
would only take two small chests, one filled with silver, and the other with gold, such as one strong
pony could carry.

At last the time came for him to say good-bye to his friends.

“Good-bye

and good luck, wherever you fare!” said Balin at last.

The dragon was dead, and the goblins
overthrown, and their hearts looked forward after winter to a spring of joy.

They intended to go along the edge of the forest, and round its
northern end in the waste that lay between it and the beginning of the Grey Mountains.

It was a long
and cheerless road, but now that the goblins were crushed, it seemed safer to them than the dreadful
pathways under the trees.

Moreover Beorn was going that way too.

He had many hardships and adventures before he got back.

The Wild was still the Wild, and
there were many other things in it in those days besides goblins; but he was well guided and well
guarded-the wizard was with him, and Beorn for much of the way-and he was never in great danger
again.

The goblins of
the Misty Mountains were now few and terrified, and hidden in the deepest holes they could find;
and the Wargs had vanished from the woods, so that men went abroad without fear.

In their day the last goblins were hunted from the Misty Mountains and a new peace came
over the edge of the Wild.

At last they came up the long road, and reached the very pass where the goblins had
captured them before.

“So comes snow
after fire, and even dragons have their ending!” said Bilbo, and he turned his back on his adventure.

This is something like it:
“The dragon is withered,
His bones are now crumbled;

The fire is more shining
On hearth in the gloaming
Than gold won by mining,
So why go a-roaming?
O!

Where are you going,
So late in returning?

It
appeared that Gandalf had been to a great council of the white wizards, masters of lore and good
magic; and that they had at last driven the Necromancer from his dark hold in the south of
Mirkwood.

When the tale of their joumeyings was told, there were other tales, and yet more tales, tales of
long ago, and tales.

He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon shining through an open window.

Your lullaby
would waken a drunken goblin!

“And your snores would waken a stone dragon –
yet we thank you,” they answered with laughter.

A second good night, fair friends!”

At each point on the road Bilbo recalled the
happenings and the words of a year ago-it seemed to him more like ten-so that, of course, he
quickly noted the place where the pony had fallen in the river, and they had turned aside for their
nasty adventure with Tom and Bert and Bill.

Not far from the road they found the gold of the trolls,
which they had buried, still hidden and untouched.

I daresay you can find a use for it.”

You may find you have more
needs than you expect.”

So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the ponies, who were not at all pleased about
it.

After that their going was slower, for most of the time they walked.

Coming to a rise he could see his own Hill in the distance,
and he stopped suddenly and said:
“Roads go ever ever on,
Over rock and under tree,

By caves where never sun has shone,
By streams that never find the sea

Roads go ever ever on
Under cloud and under star,
Yet feet that wandering have gone
Turn at last to home afar.

What’s going on?” he cried.

There was a great commotion, and people of all
sorts, respectable and unrespectable, were thick round the door, and many were going in and out-not
even wiping their feet on the mat, as Bilbo noticed with annoyance.

In short Bilbo was “Presumed Dead,” and not
everybody that said so was sorry to find the presumption wrong.

The people who had got specially good bargains at the Sale took a deal of convincing; and in
the end to sav6 time Bilbo had to buy back quite a lot of his own furniture.

His gold and
silver was largely spent in presents, both useful and extravagant – which to a certain extent accounts
for the affection of his nephews and his nieces.

If Balin
noticed that Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat was more extensive (and had real gold buttons), Bilbo also
noticed that Balm’s beard was several inches longer, and his jewelled belt was of great
magnificence.

They fell to talking of their times together, of course, and Bilbo asked how things
were going in the lands of the Mountain.

It seemed they were going very well.

Bard had given
him much gold for the help of the Lake-people, but being of the kind that easily catches such
disease he fell under the dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold and fled with it, and died of
starvation in the Waste, deserted by his companions.

They are
making songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold.”

Surely you don’t disbelieve
the prophecies, because you had a hand in bringing them about yourself?

“Thank goodness!” said Bilbo laughing, and handed him the tobacco-jar.

