replied Sir Kay. “How did you come by it? Sir,” said Arthur, asked Sir Ector. “No, none, said Sir Ector. “But why am I the King? Because,” answered Sir Ector, If I am King,” he said at last,

Look!” said Merlin, That is the Lady of the Lake,” said Merlin,

That sword is mine, King Arthur,” answered she,

By my faith,” said the King, Well,” said the maiden, Which do you like best, the sword or the scabbard?” You are not wise to say that,” replied Merlin,

It is well,” replied Merlin,

That is the best news I have ever had,” replied Leodegrance,

Fair Sirs,” said Merlin, when the Bishop had ended his blessing,

asked the man. “Yonder,

That is truth,” answered the King,

I thank you for your gracious words,” said the poor man; answered the King. “What is your name?

It is my son who desires it, and not I,” replied the man.

Take it out of its sheath,” said the King,

“Oh, my lord,

Let me see if I can draw it,” said Arthur, Sir,” said the damsel, “It is not for me, “By my faith,

“Ah! fair damsel, it is not fine clothes that make good deeds.”

No,” answered Balin, “It is for your sake, not mine, that I ask for it, “I will take what befalls me,

That blast,” said Balin,

That is a bad custom,” said Balin,

Sir,” said a Knight to him,

I repent,” answered Balin,

Alas!” cried Balin,

Alas,” sighed Balan,

Woe is me!” said Balin,

You would have done well,” answered Balan,

Why do you laugh?” asked the Knight.

I cannot tell you that,” answered he. There is little need to do that,” answered Sir Kay,

For whom?” asked the King, “I know nothing of him, “You shall have it, “All this shall be done,

and see if my kitchen boy will own me for his better.”

That is true,” answered Beaumains, laying down his arms, asked Beaumains. “Yes, Then I pray you,” cried Beaumains, You must first tell me your name,” replied Lancelot, “You will not betray me if I do?

What are you doing here?” said she. “Fie on you, Scullion,

Oh, help! help! lord,” cried he, “Show me the way, Sir,” said Beaumains,

Well, what do you say now?” asked the damsel. “I would not turn if there were six more of them,

Alas!” she cried, “I pray you be more civil in your language, said he, “but where you go I will follow you,

this is but a kitchen boy, fed by King Arthur for charity.” “I cannot be rid of him, “I wonder much, “They do not know him, “That may be, “Say you so? “It is a lie,

asked he of the damsel. “No, indeed, Alas!” sighed the Green Knight, “I defy you,

“Suffer me not to die, “It is a shame, Let be, foul knave,” then said the damsel,

I am sorry,” said the damsel,

“With all my heart,

and my lady my sister’s name is dame Lyonesse.” “My Lord Sir Persant of Inde,

Truly,” answered Beaumains,

Sir Gareth,” said dame Lyonesse,

Truly, my own lady,” answered Sir Gareth, Of a truth,” cried King Arthur, and for this day,” said Sir Lancelot,

Sir,” answered the dwarf,

Ride, I pray you,” said Sir Gawaine,

My lord,” answered Linet,

My lord,” replied Sir Gareth,

Most noble King,” said dame Lyonesse,

What, nephew,” cried the King,

Sir,” said they,

Saddle the best horse that can be found,” commanded the King,

Yes,” said the cowherd,

asked the King. “Say on here, and fear nothing. By my head,” cried Arthur,

You will miss my counsel sorely,” added Merlin, said the King, “you may surely guard against it.

“At your pleasure, Sir,

By my faith!” cried the squire,

You will pay for it dearly,” answered the man,

is it, then, a dream?”

Comfort yourself,” said Sir Lancelot,

Sirs,” said Sir Galahad, Sir,” replied they,

Sirs,” said the monk,

Well,” answered one of the Knights, whose name was King Bagdemagus,

Sir,” said the squire,

Take thou no heed of my name,” answered the Knight,

Now, fair Sir,” said the squire,

Since you have asked me,” answered the Knight,

Yes, truly,” said he, Sir Galahad,” said he, alighting before him,

Sir,” they said, Galahad,” said the figure, Fair brother,” said Galahad,

“By my faith,

Yes, Sir, forsooth,” answered Sir Percivale, “Take my hackney, Sir Percivale, what doest thou here?”

Truly,” said Sir Gawaine to Sir Ector,

One thing seems strange to me,” said Sir Ector,

I wonder,” said Sir Gawaine,

Sir,” said Gawaine,

“That is true, Now,” said the hermit, Sir,” answered Sir Bors, “That know I,

Galahad,” said she,

By my faith,” said Galahad, I will grip it,” said Galahad,

Then,” said Sir Percivale’s sister,

Truly,” answered he,

Sir,” said the new Knight,

Ah,” cried Sir Lancelot,

In truth,” he said,

it is ten years since I have gone without crutches.” said Galahad, “but rise up and show your good will.

said Sir Lancelot, “and I trust his prayer may avail me.

This shall not be ended so,” said he,

Fair lords,” said the King at last,

My gracious lord,” said Sir Mador,

Alas!” said the Queen,

My lord the King,” cried Sir Mador,

Well,” answered the King,

God help me, that I know not,” said the Queen,

Where is Sir Lancelot?” said King Arthur, looking round.

Sir,” replied the Queen,

I grieve for that,” said the King,

Alas!” sighed the Queen,

What ails you?” asked the King,

Madam,” said he,

Alas,” said the Queen,

Ah, gentle Knight,” cried the King,

My lord,” answered Sir Bors,

Yes,” answered Sir Bors,

Sir,” answered Sir Bors,

Fair lords,” said Sir Bors,

Truly, Madam,” answered he,

said Sir Mador. “Sir Mador,

Is that all?” asked Sir Mador;

Take your horse,” said Sir Bors,

That I know not,” said Sir Bors;

For that purpose I came hither,” replied he,

Sir,” said Sir Mador de la Porte unto the King, s spear broke in pieces. But the other Knight

My lord,” answered Sir Lancelot,

I owe you great thanks,” said the King,

Truly,” answered the Queen,

You must do as you please,” replied the Queen,

Madam,” said Sir Lancelot,

Who is that?” asked they all. Fair Sir,” said Sir Lancelot,

Sir,” answered Sir Bernard,

You must hold me excused as to that, just now,” said Sir Lancelot, “This shall be done,

Sir,” she answered,

Now,” said Sir Lancelot,

Spare not, Sir,” answered Sir Lavaine,

I know well who it is,” said King Arthur,

Sir,” answered Sir Gawaine,

Let him be,” said Sir Arthur, Mercy,” again cried Sir Gawaine to Arthur,

Fair Lords,” said Sir Lancelot, Oh help me, Sir Lavaine,” said he,

You cannot hide your name from me,” said the hermit,

Since you know me, Sir,” said he,

Fear nothing,” answered the hermit,

Alas!” said King Arthur,

Truly,” said they all,

As for me,” answered King Arthur,

Whether I know him or not,” said King Arthur,

By my head,” said Sir Gawaine,

Truly,” said Sir Gawaine,

Now blessed be God,” said the Maid of Astolat,

Fair Maid,” asked Sir Gawaine,

Nay, truly,” answered the damsel,

For this cause,” said the damsel,

Ah, fair damsel,” said Sir Gawaine,

Sir,” answered she,

Ah mercy,” cried he,

I have great cause,” answered Sir Gawaine.

Yes, truly,” said she;

You are right, fair damsel,” replied Gawaine,

Alas!” said she,

I did not say that,” replied Sir Gawaine,

How can this be?” said the Maid of Astolat,

Truly,” answered Sir Gawaine,

Now, dear father,” said Elaine,

Do as you will,” answered her father,

By my head,” answered Sir Gawaine,

Ah, Sir Bors,” she cried when he was come,

Madam,” answered Sir Bors,

Madam,” said Sir Bors,

Fie on him!” said the Queen,

Madam,” answered Sir Bors,

But I marvel,” said he,

Alas!” sighed Sir Lancelot,

Fair cousin,” answered Sir Lancelot,

I am sorrowful at what you tell me,” replied Sir Lancelot,

That I said to excuse you,” answered Sir Bors,

Why should she go from you?” asked Sir Bors.

Fair damsel, I thank you,” said Sir Lancelot,

Of such gifts I will have none,” answered Elaine,

Fair damsel,” said Sir Lancelot,

What should I do?” asked Sir Lavaine,

I cannot marry her,” answered Sir Lancelot,

Father,” said Sir Lavaine,

My lord Arthur,” said he, after he had heard it all,

You might have been a little gentle with her,” answered the Queen,

Madam,” said Sir Lancelot,

That is truth,” replied the King,

and,” said she, Traitor,” cried the Queen,

Fight as well as you can,” answered Sir Meliagraunce,

Madam,” replied Sir Meliagraunce,

You may slay my horse if you will,” said Sir Lancelot,

I cannot take you at all,” answered the carter,

Then I charge you,” said Sir Lancelot,

What ails you now?” said she;

You say well,” answered the Queen.

Sir Lancelot,” asked the Queen,

Madam,” replied Sir Lancelot,

You say truly,” replied the Queen,

Madam,” said Sir Lancelot,

Why do you say that?” asked the Queen;

Madam,” answered Sir Lancelot,

That I know well,” said the Queen,

Madam,” replied Sir Lancelot,

And now,” said Sir Meliagraunce,

Any Knight will bear me witness,” answered Sir Lancelot, “Then let us go to dinner, “That I will gladly,

Sir Meliagraunce has taken a great deal upon him,” said the King,

Sir,” answered they all, “Well, leave him alone,

Sir Lancelot,” said she, “If I am not there,

I thank you heartily, gentle Knight,” answered Arthur, Most noble Knight, save my life,” cried he, Listen,” answered Sir Lancelot.

Madam,” said Sir Lancelot,

Alas!” replied the Queen,

It is grievous,” said Sir Lancelot,

Traitor Knight,” cried Sir Mordred again,

Oh, mercy,” cried Sir Lancelot,

Nay, Lancelot,” said the Queen,

Well, Madam,” answered Lancelot,

Fair Lords,” said Sir Lancelot,

Open it then,” answered they,

As you like,” answered Sir Lancelot,

I will not go with you now,” answered the Queen,

Mercy!” cried Sir Lancelot,

Sir,” answered Sir Bors,

Sir,” answered Sir Bors,

Sir,” said Sir Bors,

My lord Arthur,” said Sir Gawaine,

That I believe well,” said King Arthur,

Nay, my lord, that I will never do,” cried Sir Gawaine;

Then,” said the King,

My lord,” replied Sir Gawaine,

Make yourselves ready, then,” answered the King,

Alas!” cried Sir Gawaine,

Alas!” he cried, when he recovered from his swoon,

That is true,” answered some of the Knights,

The death of those two,” said Arthur, I knew well he would deliver her,” said Sir Gawaine,

Truly,” said the man,

Heaven forbid any such thing,” returned Sir Gawaine.

He is slain,” said the man,

He cannot have slain Sir Gareth,” replied Sir Gawaine,

You cannot do that,” returned the King,

It is said,” answered the King,

My King, my lord and mine uncle,” said Sir Gawaine,

You need not seek him so far,” answered the King,

Nay,” answered Sir Lancelot,

Well, well, Sir Lancelot,” said the King,

“Mine uncle King Arthur,

Sir, let him be,” answered Sir Lucan.

Tide me death, tide me life,” said the King,

Alas!” said the King,

My lord,” answered Sir Bedivere,

Sir,” answered Sir Bedivere.

You have not dealt truly with me,” said the King.

Ah, traitor!” cried King Arthur,

Alas!” said the King,

Ah, my lord Arthur!” cried Sir Bedivere,

Comfort yourself,” replied the King,

Fair Sirs,” said Sir Lancelot,

Nay, Madam,” answered Sir Lancelot,

If you will do so,” said the Queen,

Well, Madam,” answered he,

No,” said the Queen,

You are to blame,” said the hermit, when he awaked from his swoon,

Truly,” answered Sir Lancelot,

s parentage. Uther Pendragon was King Arthur s “Morte d

till I be shriven of the priest,”

