So they
rode into the town of Carlion, and Arthur’s Knights gave them a glad
welcome, and said it was a joy to serve under a King who risked his life
as much as any common man.

Therefore Merlin rode forth and made all the haste he could till he came
to the Castle of Cameliard, and told King Leodegrance who had sent him
and why.

From every part the Knights flocked to Camelot, and the town was full to
overflowing of armed men and their horses.

One day he was riding forth when at the turning of a road he saw a
cross, and on it was written in letters of gold, “Let no Knight ride
towards this castle.”

“That blast,” said Balin, “is for me, but I am
still alive,” and he rode to the castle, where a great company of
knights and ladies met him and welcomed him, and made him a feast.

Then
the lady of the castle said to him, “Knight with the two swords, you
must now fight a Knight that guards an island, for it is our law that no
man may leave us without he first fight a tourney.”

As he went along the path he beheld a Knight come out of a castle in
front, clothed in red, riding a horse with red trappings.

“Woe is me!” said Balin, “all this was wrought by an unhappy knight in
the castle, who caused me to change my shield for his.

If I lived, I
would destroy that castle that he should not deceive other men.”

Then came the lady of the castle and
her companions, and listened as they made their moan.

And the same day Galahad came to
the river, having in his hand the scabbard, and he saw the sword and
pulled it out of the stone, as is told in another place.

As Pentecost drew near King Arthur commanded that all the Knights of the
Round Table should keep the feast at a city called Kin-Kenadon, hard by
the sands of Wales, where there was a great castle.

And Arthur called the other Kings that were in the castle, and
all the Knights of the Round Table that were a hundred and fifty, and
they sat down to dine.

“Sir,” answered
she, “my sister is a noble lady of great fame, who is besieged by a
tyrant, and may not get out of her castle.

“Fair damsel,” then said
the King, “there are many Knights here who would go gladly to the rescue
of your lady, but none of them shall do so with my consent unless you
will tell us her name, and the place of her castle.”

“Damsel,” replied Beaumains, “you may say
to me what you will, but I shall not quit you whatever you may do, for I
have vowed to King Arthur to relieve the lady in the castle, and I shall
set her free or die fighting for her.”

The Knight thanked Beaumains heartily for his
deliverance, and prayed him to come to his castle, where he would reward
him.

At this the Knight whom Beaumains had rescued rode
up to the damsel, and begged that she would rest in his castle that
night, as the sun was now setting.

In the early morning Sir Beaumains and the damsel bade farewell to the
Knight, and rode through the forest till they came to a great river,
where stood two Knights on the further side, guarding the passage.

At length Sir Beaumains dealt the
other Knight such a blow that he fell from his horse, and was drowned in
the river.

“I am sorry,” said the damsel, “for the wounds you have received, and
for your brother’s death, for I had great need of you both, and have
much dread of passing the forest.”

“Fear nothing,” answered the Green
Knight, “for this evening you shall lodge in my house, and to-morrow I
will show you the way through the forest.”

Boldly you
speak, and boldly you have done; therefore I pray you to depart and save
yourself while you may, for both you and your horse have suffered great
fatigues, and I fear we delay too long, for the besieged castle is but
seven miles from this place, and all the perils are past save this one
only.

But Sir Beaumains would not listen to her words, and vowed that
by two hours after noon he would have overthrown him, and that it would
still be daylight when they reached the castle.

So Beaumains conquered Sir Persant of Inde, who brought a hundred
Knights to be sworn into his service, and the next morning the damsel
led him to the castle, where the Red Knight of the Red Lawn held fast
the lady.

When they drew near the besieged castle Sir Beaumains
saw full forty Knights, with spurs on their heels and swords in their
hands, hanging from the tall trees that stood upon the lawn.

[Illustration: The Lady of Lyonesse sees Sir Gareth]

“Truly,” answered Beaumains, “it is a marvel that none of King Arthur’s
Knights has dealt with the Knight of the Red Lawn ere this;” and they
rode up to the castle, which had round it high walls and deep ditches,
till they came to a great sycamore tree, where hung a horn.

I will fight him as he is, or
not at all,” and Beaumains blew such a blast that it rang through the
castle.

So the battle began, and a fierce one it was, and much
ado had Beaumains to last out till noon, when the Red Knight’s strength
began to wane; they rested, and came on again, and in the end the Red
Knight yielded to Sir Beaumains, and the lords and barons in the castle
did homage to the victor, and begged that the Red Knight’s life might be
spared on condition they all took service with Beaumains.

Now Sir Beaumains had looked up at the windows of Castle Perilous before
the fight, and had seen the face of the Lady Lyonesse, and had thought
it the fairest in all the world.

After he had subdued the Red Knight, he
hasted into the castle, and the Lady Lyonesse welcomed him, and he told
her he had bought her love with the best blood in his body.

“It is well thought of,” said Arthur, and the Lady Lyonesse
departed unto Castle Perilous, and summoned all her Knights around her,
and told them what she had done, and how they were to make ready to
fight in the tournament.

She began at once to set her castle in order,
and to think what she should do with the great array of Knights that
would ride hither from the furthest parts—from Scotland and Wales and
Cornwall—and to lodge fitly the Kings, Dukes, Earls, and Barons that
should come with Arthur.

But Sir Gareth entreated the Lady
Lyonesse and those Knights that were in the castle with him not to let
his name be known, and this they agreed to.

Give it to me now, that
I may hide myself,” and he galloped swiftly into the forest, and no one
knew where he had gone.

After that Sir Gareth rode deeper into the forest.

When they reached the place they saw Sir Gareth
and Sir Gawaine sitting on the hill-side.

After that Sir Gareth set her on her way towards her castle,
and returned unto the King.

“Yes,” said the cowherd, “a
lady passed by here, with forty horses behind her, and went into the
forest yonder.”

And when she saw she could not
escape him, she rode into a lake that lay in the plain on the edge of
the forest, and, crying out, “Whatever may befall me, my brother shall
not have the scabbard,” she threw the scabbard far into the water, and
it sank, for it was heavy with gold and jewels.

And she departed into the country of Gore, and made her towns and
castles stronger than before, for she feared King Arthur greatly.

Now the King was minded to go on a pilgrimage, and he agreed with the
Queen that he would set forth to seek the holy chapel at St. Augustine,
which is in the White Forest, and may only be found by adventure.

And in his dream he set the saddle and bridle on his horse, and fastened
his spurs, and girt on his sword, and galloped out of the castle after
the King.

He rode on a long space, till he entered a thick forest, and
there before him lay traces of the King’s horse, and he followed till
the marks of the hoofs ceased suddenly at some open ground and he
thought that the King had alighted there.

On his journey through the forest he was stopped by a man black and
ill-favoured, holding a large knife in his hand.

After this King Arthur would have none to go with him on his quest, and
many strange adventures he achieved before he reached the chapel of St.
Augustine, which was in the midst of the White Forest.

Sir Galahad left him there, and rode on till he came to the Castle
of Maidens, which he alone might enter who was free from sin.

There he
chased away the Knights who had seized the castle seven years agone, and
restored all to the Duke’s daughter, who owned it of right.

And in the morning one came to
him and told him that as the seven Knights fled from the Castle of
Maidens they fell upon the path of Sir Gawaine, Sir Gareth, and Sir
Lewaine, who were seeking Sir Galahad, and they gave battle: and the
seven Knights were slain by the three Knights.

So when Sir Galahad left the Castle of Maidens he rode till he came to a
waste forest, and there he met with Sir Lancelot and Sir Percivale; but
they knew him not, for he was now disguised.

But Sir Galahad feared that she would make
known who he was, so he spurred his horse and struck deep into the
forest before Sir Lancelot and Sir Percivale could mount again.

And at last
the foes fled deep into the forest, and Sir Galahad followed; but Sir
Percivale had no horse and was forced to stay behind.

As soon as it was day
he looked about him, and saw he was in a wild mountain, girt round with
the sea and filled with wild beasts.

As Lancelot went his way through the forest he met with many hermits who
dwelled therein, and had adventure with the Knight who stole his horse
and his helm, and got them back again.

As he rode he came to a fair plain, in which was a great
castle set about with tents and pavilions of divers hues.

Here were full
five hundred Knights riding on horseback, and those near the castle were
mounted on black horses with black trappings, and they that were without
were on white horses and their trappings white.

At last it seemed to him that the black Knights nearest the castle fared
the worst, so, as he ever took the part of the weaker, he rode to their
help and smote many of the white Knights to the earth and did marvellous
deeds of arms.

And as no man may endure for ever, in the end Sir Lancelot
waxed so faint of fighting that his arms would not lift themselves to
deal a stroke; then they took him, and led him away into the forest and
made him alight from his horse and rest, and when he was taken the
fellowship of the castle were overcome for want of him.

On the shore they saw three score Knights by a
castle to which they repaired.

And the owner of this castle was a
gentlewoman on whom years ago had befallen a great malady of which there
was but one remedy.

And therefore there shall be
no battle, but to-morrow at morn I shall yield you your custom of this
castle.”

And after six months had gone it befell that on a
Monday they drifted to the edge of the forest, where they saw a Knight
with white armour bestriding one horse and holding another all white, by
the bridle.

First
they came to the Castle of Carbonek, where dwelled King Pelles, who
welcomed them with joy, for he knew by their coming the quest of the
Graal would be fulfilled.

That same night at midnight a voice bade them
arise and quit the castle, which they did, followed by three Knights of
Gaul.

At this the
King was wroth, that he might not have either his Queen or his best
Knight with him, and he departed towards Winchester and by the way
lodged in a town now called Guildford, but then Astolat.

He went through the town till
he stopped before the house of an old Baron, Sir Bernard of Astolat, and
as he dismounted from his horse, the King spied him from the gardens of
the castle.

“You must wait to know that,” replied the
King, and went into the castle.

And if he may be
found, I shall find him, for I am sure he is not far from this town;” so
he took his Squire with him, and they rode all round Camelot, six or
seven miles on every side, but nothing could they hear of him.

Therefore as Sir Lancelot commanded, Sir Lavaine rode to Winchester and
inquired if Sir Bors had been seen there, so that when he entered the
town Sir Lavaine readily found him.

The King
summoned Sir Kay, and bade him take Sir Brandiles and Sir Agrawaine, and
find out who was lying there, and they ran down to the river side, and
came and told the King.

Then one day there rode up to the Castle
a band of horsemen sent by the King to bring her to his Court, and at
the head of them Sir Lancelot du Lake, friend of King Arthur, and winner
of all the jousts and tournaments where Knights meet to gain honour.

It befell one spring, in the month of May, that Queen Guenevere
bethought herself that she would like to go a-maying in the woods and
fields that lay round the City of Westminster on both sides of the
river.

Out
of the forest he rode, with two score men in armour, and a hundred
archers behind him, and bade the Queen and her followers stay where they
were, or they would fare badly.

For I give you
warning that I would rather slay myself than go with you without my
Knights, whose duty it is to guard me.”

“Madam,” replied Sir Meliagraunce, “for your sake they shall be led with
you into my own castle, if you will consent to ride with me.”

The fight being ended the wounded Knights were placed on horseback, some
sitting, some lying across the saddle, according as they were hurt, and
Sir Meliagraunce forbade any one to leave the castle (which had been a
gift to him from King Arthur), for sore he dreaded the vengeance of Sir
Lancelot if this thing should reach his ears.

And he bade his men follow him to the castle in haste, and left an
ambush of thirty archers in the road, charging them that if a Knight
mounted on a white horse came along that way they were to slay the horse
but to leave the man alone, as he was hard to overcome.

After Sir
Meliagraunce had given these orders his company galloped fast to the
castle; but the Queen would listen to nothing that he said, demanding
always that her Knights and ladies should be lodged with her, and Sir
Meliagraunce was forced to let her have her will.

The castle of Sir Meliagraunce was distant seven miles from Westminster,
so it did not take long for the boy to find Sir Lancelot, and to give
him the Queen’s ring and her message.

“And pray him, as he loves me, that he
follow me to the castle of Sir Meliagraunce, for if I am a living man,
he will find me there.”

“Tell me, carter,” said
Sir Lancelot, “what will you take to suffer me to go in your cart till
we are within two miles of the castle of Sir Meliagraunce?”

“I cannot take you at all,” answered the carter, “for I am come to fetch
wood for my lord Sir Meliagraunce.”

“Then I charge you,” said Sir Lancelot, “that you bring
me to the castle gate.”

In an hour and a half
they reached the castle gate, and were seen of Guenevere and her ladies,
who were standing in a window.

By this Sir Lancelot had
come to the gate of the castle, and he got down and called till the
castle rang with his voice.

“Rule in this castle as if it were your own, and give Sir Lancelot cheer
till to-morrow, and then you shall all return to Westminster.”

“You say well,” answered the Queen.

Meanwhile would it please
you to see the inside of this castle?”

“That I will gladly,” said Sir
Lancelot, and they went from chamber to chamber, till they reached the
floor of the castle, and as he went Sir Lancelot trod on a trap and the
board rolled, and he fell down in a cave which was filled with straw,
and Sir Meliagraunce departed and no man knew where Sir Lancelot might
be.

“He will be
here when the day comes, unless some treason has befallen him.”

All this while Sir Lancelot was lying in great pain within the cave, and
he would have died for lack of food had not one of the ladies in the
castle found out the place where he was held captive, and brought him
meat and drink, and hoped that he might be brought to love her.

When the clamour of the battle was
still, Sir Lancelot turned back to the Queen and said, “Alas, Madam,
they will make King Arthur my foe, and yours also, but if you will come
with me to my castle, I will save you from all dangers.”

Then they all took counsel together how the
thing might best be done, and Sir Bors deemed it wise to carry her off
to the Castle of Joyous Gard, and counselled that she should be kept
there, a prisoner, till the King’s anger was past and he would be
willing to welcome her back again.

To this the other Knights agreed, and
by the advice of Sir Lancelot they hid themselves in a wood close by the
town till they saw what King Arthur would do.

Right thankful was the Queen at being snatched from the fire,
and her heart was grateful to Sir Lancelot, who took her to his Castle
of Joyous Gard, and many noble Knights and Kings had fellowship with
them.

“You need not seek him so far,” answered the King, “for I am told that
Sir Lancelot will await me and you in the Castle of Joyous Gard, and
many people are flocking to him.

The Castle of Joyous Gard was strong, and after fifteen weeks had passed
no breach had been made in its walls.

And when the dawn broke a
great host marched out of the Castle of Joyous Gard, with Sir Lancelot
at the head, and Sir Bors and Sir Lionel commanding on either side.

A goodly host of a hundred Knights rode eight days later from the Castle
of Joyous Gard; every Knight was clothed in green velvet, and held in
his hand a branch of olive, and bestrode a horse with trappings down to
his heels.

When they reached the castle, Sir Lancelot sprang from
his horse and helped the Queen from hers, and led her to where King
Arthur sat, with Sir Gawaine and many lords around him.

And after
many sieges and long fighting it befell upon a day, that Sir Gawaine
came before the gates of Sir Lancelot’s town, armed at all points, and
sitting on a noble horse, with a great spear in his hand.

And after writing this
letter, at the hour of noon, Sir Gawaine gave up his spirit, and was
buried by the King in the chapel within Dover Castle.

[Illustration: THE LAST BATTLE / Sir Mordred]

“Would that I could quit this place to go to some large town,” said the
King, when he had heard this, “but I cannot stand, my head works so.

Then the
people told him that the King was slain, and Sir Mordred, and an hundred
thousand men besides, and that the King had buried Sir Gawaine in the
chapel at Dover Castle.

All that day and the next night he
rode through the forest till he beheld a hermitage and a chapel between
two cliffs, and heard a little bell ring to Mass.

Carlion, or Carleon, at that time an important city in
South Wales, situated about six miles from the mouth of the river Usk.

Gore, or Gower, is a strip of hilly country in
Glamorganshire, running out into the sea, and ending in Worm’s Head.

