Long, long ago, after Uther Pendragon died, no king reigned in Britain,
and every Knight hoped to seize the crown for himself.

The country was
like to fare ill when laws were broken on every side, and the corn which
was to give bread to the poor was trodden underfoot, and there was none
to bring the evildoer to justice.

And on Christmas morning, as they left the church, they
saw in the churchyard a large stone, and on it a bar of steel, and in
the steel a naked sword was held, and about it was written in letters of
gold, “Whoso pulleth out this sword is by right of birth King of
England.”

The Archbishop
watched them in silence, but when they were faint from pulling he spoke:
“The man is not here who shall lift out that sword, nor do I know where
to find him.

But this is my counsel—that two Knights be chosen, good and
true men, to keep guard over the sword.”

Now Kay had unbuckled his sword the evening before, and
in his haste to be at the tourney had forgotten to put it on again, and
he begged Arthur to ride back and fetch it for him.

But when Arthur
reached the house the door was locked, for the women had gone out to see
the tourney, and, though Arthur tried his best to get in, he could not.

You are the son of
Uther Pendragon, and you were brought to me when you were born by Merlin
himself, who promised that when the time came you should know from whom
you sprang.”

“Sir,” answered
Merlin, “what you say as to her beauty is true, but, if your heart was
not set on her, I could find you another as fair, and of more goodness,
than she.

Then Merlin asked the King to give him a company of knights and
esquires, that he might go to the Court of King Leodegrance and tell him
that King Arthur desired to wed his daughter, which Arthur did gladly.

As for lands to endow her with, I would give whatever he
chose; but he has lands enough of his own, so I will give him instead
something that will please him much more, the Round Table which Uther
Pendragon gave me, where a hundred and fifty Knights can sit at one
time.

I myself can call to my side a hundred good Knights, but I lack
fifty, for the wars have slain many, and some are absent.”

“Now, Merlin,” said the King,
“go and look about my kingdom and bring fifty of the bravest and most
famous Knights that can be found throughout the land.”

But no more than
eight and twenty Knights could Merlin find.

So the Knights arose to do
his bidding, and in every seat was the name of the Knight who had sat on
it, written in letters of gold, but two seats were empty.

As the King was speaking, a poor man entered the Court, bringing with
him a youth about eighteen years old, riding on a lean mare, though it
was not the custom for gentlemen to ride on mares.

“I have
thirteen sons who tend cattle, and work in the fields if I bid them; but
this boy will do nothing but shoot and cast darts, or go to watch
battles and look on Knights, and all day long he beseeches me to bring
him to you, that he may be knighted also.”

And when they were all
assembled, there rode in a damsel, who said she had come with a message
from the great Lady Lile of Avelion, and begged that they would bring
her before King Arthur.

“Oh, my lord,” answered she,
“I would I could find some Knight to rid me of this sword, which weighs
me down and causes me much sorrow.

If I find a Knight such as this, he will draw this
sword out of its sheath, and he only.

“Alas! alas!” cried the damsel in great grief,
“I thought to find in this Court Knights that were blameless and true of
heart, and now I know not where to look for them.”

“By my faith,” said
Arthur, “there are no better Knights in the world than these of mine,
but I am sore displeased that they cannot help me in this matter.”

“Ah! fair damsel,” said Balin,
“it is not fine clothes that make good deeds.”

“It is for your sake, not mine, that I ask for it,” said the
damsel, “for with that sword you shall slay the man you love best, and
it will bring about your own ruin.”

The next day Sir Balin
left the Court, and, armed with his sword, set forth in search of
adventures, which he found in many places where he had not thought to
meet with them.

One day he was riding forth when at the turning of a road he saw a
cross, and on it was written in letters of gold, “Let no Knight ride
towards this castle.”

“I repent,” answered Balin, “ever having come into this country, but for
very shame I must go on.

“My name,” said he, “is Balan, brother
to the good Knight Balin.”

But Merlin knew, and next
morning he came and wrote it in letters of gold, and he ungirded Balin’s
sword, and unscrewed the pommel, and put another pommel on it, and bade
a Knight that stood by handle it, but the Knight could not.

The scabbard of the sword he left on
this side of the island, so that Galahad should find it.

Then Sir Gawaine went to
the King and said, “Sir, go to your food, for strange adventures are at
hand.”

Then the tall young man stood up straight, and
said: “King Arthur, God bless you and all your fair fellowship, and in
especial the fellowship of the Table Round.

“That is strange,” replied the
King, “but you are the goodliest young man I ever saw,” and, turning to
Sir Kay, the steward, charged him to give the young man to eat and drink
of the best, and to treat him in all ways as if he were a lord’s son.

But as the birth of a man is so are his requests.

And Sir Lancelot gave him gold to spend, and
clothes to wear, and so did Gawaine.

Also, if there were any games held
whereat he might be, none could throw a bar nor cast a stone as far as
he by two good yards.

But King Arthur would eat no meat
at Whitsuntide till some adventures were told him, and glad was he when
a squire came and said to him, “Sir you may go to your food, for here is
a damsel with some strange tales.”

At this the damsel was led into the
hall, and bowed low before the King, and begged he would give her help.

“Sir King,”
answered she, “as for my sister’s name, I cannot tell it you now, but
she is a lady of great beauty and goodness, and of many lands.

“Fair damsel,” then said
the King, “there are many Knights here who would go gladly to the rescue
of your lady, but none of them shall do so with my consent unless you
will tell us her name, and the place of her castle.”

“Fie on
you,” cried the damsel, “will you give me none but a kitchen boy to
rescue my lady?”

Many looked upon
him and marvelled at the strength of his horse, and its golden
trappings, and envied Beaumains his shining coat of mail; but they noted
that he had neither shield nor spear.

Sir Lancelot
was the first to rise, and he helped Beaumains from his horse, and
Beaumains threw his shield from him, and offered to fight on foot.

And
they rushed together like wild boars, turning and thrusting and parrying
for the space of an hour, and Sir Lancelot marvelled at the young man’s
strength, and thought he was more like a giant than a Knight, and
dreading lest he himself should be put to shame, he said: “Beaumains, do
not fight so hard, we have no quarrel that forbids us to leave off.”
“That is true,” answered Beaumains, laying down his arms, “but it does
me good, my lord, to feel your might.”

“Well,” said Sir Lancelot, “I
promise you I had much ado to save myself from you unshamed, therefore
have no fear of any other Knight.”

I was sure you came of
good blood, and that you did not come to the Court for meat and drink
only.”

After that Sir Gareth wished to go his own ways, and departed.

When he
was gone, Sir Lancelot went back to Sir Kay and ordered some men that
were by to bear him home on a shield, and in time his wounds were
healed; but he was scorned of all men, and especially of Sir Gawaine and
Sir Lancelot, who told him it was no good deed to treat any young man
so, and no one could tell what his birth might be, or what had brought
him to the Court.

Go back to King Arthur’s kitchen,
which is your proper place.”

“Oh, help!

help!

At this the Knight whom Beaumains had rescued rode
up to the damsel, and begged that she would rest in his castle that
night, as the sun was now setting.

“I am trying to turn you back for your own
good,” answered she, “for if you follow me you are certainly a dead man,
as well I know all you have won before has been by luck.”

“Say what you
will, damsel,” said he, “but where you go I will follow you,” and they
rode together till eventide, and all the way she chid him and gave him
no rest.

“I defy you,” said Beaumains,
“for I slew him as a good Knight should.”

“Fie upon thee, false
kitchen page!” said the damsel, “I will never pray to save his life, for
I am sure he is in no danger.”

“Suffer me not to die,” entreated the
Knight, “when a word may save me!

Fair Knight,” he went on, turning to
Beaumains, “save my life, and I will forgive you the death of my
brother, and will do you service for ever, and will bring thirty of my
Knights to serve you likewise.”

“Damsel,” answered Beaumains, “it
is a pleasure to me to obey you, and at your wish I will save his life.

Sir Knight with the green arms, I release you at the request of this
damsel, and I will fulfil all she charges me.”

But the damsel did not mend her ways with Beaumains, and ever
more reviled him, till the Green Knight rebuked her, saying Beaumains
was the noblest Knight that held a spear, and that in the end she would
find he had sprung from some great King.

In like manner
did Sir Beaumains overcome the Red Knight, who was the third brother,
and the Red Knight cried for mercy, and offered to bring sixty Knights
to do him service, and Beaumains spared his life at the request of the
damsel, and likewise it so happened to Sir Persant of Inde.

Boldly you
speak, and boldly you have done; therefore I pray you to depart and save
yourself while you may, for both you and your horse have suffered great
fatigues, and I fear we delay too long, for the besieged castle is but
seven miles from this place, and all the perils are past save this one
only.

“What sort of a man can
you be?” answered the damsel, looking at him in wonder, “for never did a
woman treat a Knight as ill and shamefully as I have done you, while you
have always been gentle and courteous to me, and no one bears himself
like that save he who is of noble blood.”

“With all my heart,” he answered, “and since
you are pleased now to speak good words to me, know that I hear them
gladly, and there is no Knight living

“Heaven defend you,” cried Sir Persant, when they told him
where they were going; “that is the most perilous Knight now living, for
he has the strength of seven men.

“Sir,” answered Beaumains, “I
thank you for your goodwill, but at the beginning of this quest I was
made a Knight by Sir Lancelot.

And when the lady
heard all that Beaumains had done, and how he had overthrown all who
stood in his way, she bade her dwarf take baked venison, and fat capons,
and two silver flagons of wine and a gold cup, and put them into the
hands of a hermit that dwelt in a hermitage close by.

“Fair Sir,”
said the damsel, “these Knights came hither to rescue my sister, dame
Lyonesse; and if you cannot overthrow the Knight of the Red Lawn, you
will hang there too.”

But if he had a
wife already he should be given a white ger-falcon, and for his wife a
crown of gold, set about with precious stones.

This ring is like no
other ring, it will turn green red, and blue white, and the bearer shall
lose no blood, however sore he may be wounded.”

“Truly, my own lady,” answered Sir Gareth, “this ring will serve me
well, and by its help I shall not fear that any man shall know me.”

“Of a truth,” cried King Arthur, “that Knight
with the many colours is a good Knight,” and he called Sir Lancelot and
bade him to challenge that Knight to combat.

When Sir Gareth saw that, he rode in between them,
but no stroke would he deal Sir Lancelot, which Sir Lancelot noted, and
guessed that it was the good Knight Sir Gareth.

Then his dwarf
who had been watching eagerly, cried out to Sir Gareth to leave the ring
with him, lest he should lose it while he was drinking, which Sir Gareth
did; and when he had drunk and mended his helm he forgot the ring, at
which the dwarf was glad, for he knew his name could no longer be hid.

And when Sir Gareth returned to the field, his armour shone yellow like
gold, and King Arthur marvelled what Knight he was, for he saw by his
hair that he was the same Knight who had worn the many colours.

“Go,” he
said to his heralds, “ride near him and see what manner of Knight he is,
for none can tell me his name.”

So a herald drew close to him, and saw
that on his helm was written in golden letters “This helm belongs to Sir
Gareth of Orkney”; and the herald cried out and made proclamation, and
the Kings and Knights pressed to behold him.

Give it to me now, that
I may hide myself,” and he galloped swiftly into the forest, and no one
knew where he had gone.

“Your
counsel is good,” said Gareth; “take it to her, and commend me to her
grace, and say I will come when I may, and bid her to be faithful to me,
as I am to her.”

He was standing alone after they had gone,
when he beheld an armed Knight coming towards him.

“What are you going to do now?” asked
she.

“My lord,” answered Linet, “you must, by your grace, hold her excused,
for she does not know that Sir Gareth is here.”

“Go and fetch her, then,” said Arthur.

“That I will do quickly,” replied Linet, and by the next morning she had
brought dame Lyonesse, and her brother Sir Gringamore, and forty
Knights, but among the ladies dame Lyonesse was the fairest, save only
Queen Guenevere.

Then you
shall have all the help that is in my power,” and so said Gareth’s
mother.

And before she departed she had from King Arthur a shining golden bee,
as a token.

One day Morgan le Fay went to Queen Guenevere, and asked her leave to go
into the country.

Early next morning at break of day Morgan le Fay mounted her horse and
rode all day and all night, and at noon next day reached the Abbey of
nuns where King Arthur had gone to rest, for he had fought a hard
battle, and for three nights had slept but little.

“Do not wake him,”
said Morgan le Fay, who had come there knowing she would find him, “I
will rouse him myself when I think he has had enough sleep,” for she
thought to steal his sword Excalibur from him.

When the King awoke and missed his scabbard, he was angry, and asked who
had been there; and the nuns told him that it was his sister Morgan le
Fay, who had gone away with a scabbard under her mantle.—“Alas!”

They had not gone far before they met a cowherd, and they stopped to ask
if he had seen any lady riding that way.

And when she saw she could not
escape him, she rode into a lake that lay in the plain on the edge of
the forest, and, crying out, “Whatever may befall me, my brother shall
not have the scabbard,” she threw the scabbard far into the water, and
it sank, for it was heavy with gold and jewels.

He then sought high and low for the
scabbard, but being unable to find it, he returned to the Abbey.

When
Arthur was gone, Morgan le Fay turned herself and her horses and her men
back into their former shapes and said, “Now, Sirs, we may go where we
will.”

And she departed into the country of Gore, and made her towns and
castles stronger than before, for she feared King Arthur greatly.

“Sir,” said the
lady, “do not put on this mantle, or suffer your Knights to put it on,
till the bringer of it has worn it in your presence.”

Many of King Arthur’s Knights set out on journeys in search of
adventure, and one of them, Sir Pellinore, brought a damsel of the lake
to Arthur’s Court, and when Merlin saw her he fell in love with her, so
that he desired to be always in her company.

Then Vivien put forth all her powers,
and told Merlin how she longed to see the wonders beneath the stone,
and, in spite of all his wisdom, Merlin listened to her and crept under
the rock to bring forth the strange things that lay there.

THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAAL.

Now the King was minded to go on a pilgrimage, and he agreed with the
Queen that he would set forth to seek the holy chapel at St. Augustine,
which is in the White Forest, and may only be found by adventure.

Much
he wished to undertake the quest alone, but this the Queen would not
suffer, and to do her pleasure he consented that a youth, tall and
strong of limb, should ride with him as his squire.

“At your pleasure, Sir,” answered the youth,
whose heart rejoiced because he was going alone with the King.

In his dream it seemed that the King had ridden away to the quest, and
had left his squire behind him, which filled the young man with fear.

But no man did he behold save a Knight that lay dead
upon a bier in the midst of the chapel, covered with a pall of rich
silk, and four tapers in golden candlesticks were burning round him.

Then he took out
one of the tall tapers, and hid the candlestick under his cloak, and
rode away until he should find the King.

“No, but I have met you, and I am glad thereof, for you have under your
cloak one of the candlesticks of gold that was placed in honour of the
Knight who lies dead in the chapel.

And when the squire dreamed this, he cried,
“Help!

help!

Then the King grieved that the
young man had come to his death in such strange wise, and ordered him a
fair burial, and desired that the golden candlestick should be sent to
the Church of Saint Paul in London, which at that time was newly built.

After this King Arthur would have none to go with him on his quest, and
many strange adventures he achieved before he reached the chapel of St.
Augustine, which was in the midst of the White Forest.

And he resolved greatly to amend his sins, and to bring peace and order
into his kingdom.

When it had
gone their tongues were loosened, and the King gave thanks for the
wonders that they had been permitted to see.

After that he had finished,
Sir Gawaine stood up and vowed to depart the next morning in quest of
the Holy Graal, and not to return until he had seen it.

“But if after a
year and a day I may not speed in my quest,” said he, “I shall come
again, for I shall know that the sight of it is not for me.”

For through you is
broken up the fairest fellowship, and the truest of knighthood, that
ever the world saw, and when they have once departed they shall meet no
more at the Table Round, for many shall die in the quest.

And next morning the King and Queen went into the Minster, and the
Knights followed them, dressed all in armour, save only their shields
and their helmets.

When the service was finished the King would know how
many of the fellowship had sworn to undertake the quest of the Graal,
and they were counted, and found to number a hundred and fifty.

After King Bagdemagus had ridden two miles he entered a fair valley, and
there met him a goodly Knight seated on a white horse and clad in white
armour.

Therewith
the strange Knight alighted and took the white shield from him, and gave
it to the squire, saying, “Bear this shield to the good Knight Sir
Galahad that thou hast left in the Abbey, and greet him well from me.”

“Since you have asked me,” answered the Knight, “know that no man shall
bear this shield, save Sir Galahad only.”

Then the squire turned to Bagdemagus, and asked him whether he were
wounded or not.

“Sir Galahad,” said he, alighting before him, “the Knight that
wounded Bagdemagus sends you greeting, and bids you bear this shield,
which shall bring you many adventures.”

“Now blessed be God and fortune,” answered Sir Galahad, and called for
his arms, and mounted his horse, hanging the shield about his neck.

The monks made great joy at seeing Sir Galahad again, for they feared he
was gone for ever; and as soon as he was alighted from his horse they
brought him unto a tomb in the churchyard where there was night and day
such a noise that any man who heard it would be driven nigh mad, or else
lose his strength.

Sir Galahad
drew near, all armed save his helmet, and stood by the tomb.

“Lift up
the stone,” said a monk, and Galahad lifted it, and a voice cried, “Come
thou not nigh me, Sir Galahad, for thou shalt make me go again where I
have been so long.”

So Sir Galahad and Sir
Melias departed thence, in quest of the Holy Graal, but they soon went
their different ways and fell upon different adventures.

In his first
encounter Sir Melias was sore wounded, and Sir Galahad came to his help,
and left him to an old monk who said that he would heal him of his
wounds in the space of seven weeks, and that he was thus wounded because
he had not come clean to the quest of the Graal, as Sir Galahad had
done.

There he
chased away the Knights who had seized the castle seven years agone, and
restored all to the Duke’s daughter, who owned it of right.

“God be with
thee, thou best Knight in the world,” cried a nun who dwelt in a
hermitage close by; and she said it in a loud voice, so that Lancelot
and Percivale might hear.

“By my faith,” said the Knight,
“he is unhappy, whoever he is, for he is of the fellowship of the Round
Table, which have undertaken the quest of the Graal.”

“Sir,” replied the
squire, “you have all your arms here, save only your sword and your
helm.

After they had gone Sir Lancelot waked up wholly, and thought of what he
had seen, wondering if he were in a dream or not.

Suddenly a voice spoke
to him and it said, “Sir Lancelot, more hard than is the stone, more
bitter than is the wood, more naked and barren than is the leaf of the
fig tree, art thou; therefore go from hence and withdraw thee from this
holy place.”

But his helm and
sword had gone from the spot where he had laid them at the foot of the
cross, and his horse was gone also.

And as his horse
was gone also, he departed on foot with a heavy heart.

All this while Sir Percivale had pursued adventures of his own, and came
nigh unto losing his life, but he was saved from his enemies by the good
Knight, Sir Galahad, whom he did not know, although he was seeking him,
for Sir Galahad now bore a red shield, and not a white one.

Then his eyes were
opened, and he knew it was Sir Galahad who had come to his help, and he
sat down under a tree and grieved sore.

“Ah, Sir, that is my steed which he has taken from
me, and wherever my lord shall find me, he is sure to slay me.”

“Well,”
said Sir Percivale, “thou seest that I am on foot, but had I a good
horse

“Neither good nor great
ill,” answered he.

Then he rose and went into a
valley, and there he saw a young serpent bring a young lion by the neck,
and after that there passed a great lion, crying and roaring after the
serpent, and a fierce battle began between them.

Sir Percivale thought
to help the lion, as he was the more natural beast of the twain, and he
drew his sword and set his shield before him, and gave the serpent a
deadly buffet.

And about noon the lion took his little whelp, and
placed him on his back, and bare him home again, and Sir Percivale,
being left alone, prayed till he was comforted.

As Lancelot went his way through the forest he met with many hermits who
dwelled therein, and had adventure with the Knight who stole his horse
and his helm, and got them back again.

And he learned from one of the
hermits that Sir Galahad was his son, and that it was he who at the
Feast of Pentecost had sat in the Siege Perilous, which it was ordained
by Merlin that none should sit in save the best Knight in the world.

At last it seemed to him that the black Knights nearest the castle fared
the worst, so, as he ever took the part of the weaker, he rode to their
help and smote many of the white Knights to the earth and did marvellous
deeds of arms.

And the white
Knights were they who had chosen the way of holiness, and in them the
quest has already begun.

Thus you beheld both the sinners and the good
men, and when you saw the sinners overcome you went to their help, as
they were your fellows in boasting and pride of the world, and all that
must be left in that quest.

But it befell on a day that he met Sir
Ector de Maris, at which they rejoiced exceedingly, complaining to one
another of the lack of adventure in the quest on which they were set.

“Truly,” said Sir Gawaine to Sir Ector, “I am nigh weary of this quest,
and loth to follow it to further strange countries.”

“Sir,” said Gawaine, “by your words it seems that our sins will not let
us labour in that quest?”

“Truly,” answered the hermit, “there be an
hundred such as you to whom it will bring naught but shame.”

When Sir Bors left Camelot on his quest he met a holy man riding on an
ass, and Sir Bors saluted him.

Anon the good man knew him to be one of
the Knights who were in quest of the Holy Graal.

“What are you?” said
he, and Sir Bors answered, “I am a Knight that fain would be counselled
in the quest of the Graal, for he shall have much earthly worship that
brings it to an end.”

“That is true,” said the good man, “for he will be
the best Knight in the world, but know well that there shall none attain
it but by holiness and by confession of sin.”

So they rode together till
they came to the hermitage, and the good man led Sir Bors into the
chapel, where he made confession of his sins, and they ate bread and
drank water together.

Also instead of a shirt you shall wear
this garment until you have achieved your quest,” and Sir Bors took off
his clothes, and put on instead a scarlet coat.

Then the good man
questioned him, and marvelled to find him pure in life, and he armed him
and bade him go.

[Illustration: HOW SIR BORS WAS SAVED FROM KILLING HIS BROTHER]

After this Sir Bors rode through many lands, and had many adventures,
and was often sore tempted, but remembered the words of the holy man and
kept his life clean of wrong.

With that the voice spoke to him saying, “Bors,
go hence and bear your brother fellowship no longer; but take your way
to the sea, where Sir Percivale abides till you come.”

When he waked he saw a Knight lying in the midst of the ship, all armed
save for his helm, and he knew him for Sir Percivale, and welcomed him
with great joy; and they told each other of their adventures and of
their temptations, and had great happiness in each other’s company.

“We
lack nothing but Galahad, the good Knight,” Sir Percivale said.

And Sir Galahad bade her go, and he
would follow wherever she led.

At the end of the ship was written these words: “Thou man which shalt
enter this ship beware thou be in steadfast belief; if thou fail, I
shall not help thee.”

“Sir,” answered the gentlewoman, “know that no man can
draw this sword save you alone;” and she told him many tales of the
Knights who had set their hands to it, and of the evil things that had
befallen them.

And the owner of this castle was a
gentlewoman on whom years ago had befallen a great malady of which there
was but one remedy.

And the Knights accosted them, and counselled them to withdraw, saying
they might go without harm, only they must needs have their custom.

But night fell, and a good Knight promised to harbour
them for the night safely and surely, saying, “On the morrow we dare say
you will accord with the custom.”

It chanced that while she bled on
the morrow, she lifted her hands and blessed them, and she said, “Madam,
I die to make you whole, for God’s love pray for me.”

In her hand Sir Percivale put a letter showing how she had
helped them, and they covered her with black silk; so the wind arose and
drove the barge from the land, and all Knights beheld it disappear from
sight.

When he was come to a water called Mortoise he fell asleep, awaiting for
the adventure that should be sent to him, and in his sleep a voice spoke
to him, and bade him rise and take his armour, and enter the first ship
he should find.

for my heart goeth out to you.”

So dwelled Lancelot and
Galahad in that ship for half a year, and served God daily and nightly
with all their power.

And after six months had gone it befell that on a
Monday they drifted to the edge of the forest, where they saw a Knight
with white armour bestriding one horse and holding another all white, by
the bridle.

And he came to the ship, and saluted the two Knights and
said, “Galahad, you have been long enough with your father, therefore
leave that ship and start upon this horse, and go on the quest of the
Holy Graal.”

How Sir Galahad found the Graal and died of that Finding.

First
they came to the Castle of Carbonek, where dwelled King Pelles, who
welcomed them with joy, for he knew by their coming the quest of the
Graal would be fulfilled.

So long he prayed that at
length a voice said to him, “Galahad, thou shalt have thy desire, and
when thou askest the death of the body thou shalt have it, and shalt
find the life of the soul.”

At the sight of the old man Sir Galahad called to him to help
them carry the table, for it was heavy.

“Truly,” answered the old man,
“it is ten years since I have gone without crutches.”

“Care not for
that,” said Galahad, “but rise up and show your good will.”

This reached the
ears of the King, who sent for the Knights and questioned them.

, he ordered that a coffer of gold and precious stones
should be made to encompass the table of silver, and every day he and
the two Knights would kneel before it and make their prayers.

Then
Galahad went to Percivale and kissed him, and commended him to God; and
he went to Sir Bors and kissed him, and commended him to God, and said,
“Fair lord, salute me to my lord Sir Lancelot, my father, and bid him
remember this unstable world.”

And now the Knights were few that survived the search for the
Graal, and the evil days of Arthur began.

So the quest of the Holy Graal had been fulfilled, and the few Knights
that had been left alive returned to the Round Table, and there was
great joy in the Court.

But by ill fortune it befell that the
good Knight Sir Patrise took a poisoned apple, and in a few moments he
lay dead and stark in his seat.

Sure I am that this deed is none of hers, therefore many a good
Knight will stand her champion that she be not burned to death in a
wrong quarrel.

And Sir Mador, hold not your head so high, but fix the
day of battle, when you shall find a Knight to answer you, or else it
were great shame to all my Court.”

And if it happens that
there be a Knight to fight with you, strike as hard as you will, God
will speed the right.

“God help me, that I know not,” said the Queen, “nor how
it was done.”

“Where is Sir Lancelot?” said King Arthur, looking round.

Now go your way, and command
Sir Bors to do battle with you for Sir Lancelot’s sake.”

So the Queen
departed from the King, and sent for Sir Bors into her chamber, and when
he came she besought his help.

But they answered him: “As for our lord King Arthur, we love
him and honour him as much as you; but as for Queen Guenevere, we love
her not, for she is the destroyer of good Knights.”

“Fair lords,” said Sir Bors, “you shall not speak such words, for never
yet have I heard that she was the destroyer of good Knights.

Sir Bors likewise made answer that Queen Guenevere had
done no wrong, and that he would make good with his two hands.

“Sir Mador,” answered Sir Bors, “I know you
for a good Knight, but I trust to be able to withstand your malice; and
I have promised King Arthur and my Lady the Queen that I will do battle
for her to the uttermost, unless there come forth a better Knight than I
am.”

For I have come a great journey to fight this fight, as
I promised when I spoke with you last, and I thank you heartily for your
goodwill.”

“For that purpose I came hither,” replied he, “and therefore,
Sir King, delay me no longer, for as soon as I have ended this battle I
must go hence, as I have many matters elsewhere.

The Knights who were standing round looked at each other at these words,
and wondered much what man this was who took the battle upon him, for
none knew him save Sir Bors.

“It grieves me you should say that,” said the
King, “for you will not have seen so noble a company gathered together
this seven years past, save at the Whitsuntide when Galahad departed
from the Court.”

“Truly,” answered the Queen, “the sight will be grand.

And when the
King had set forth, the Queen sent for Sir Lancelot, and told him he was
to blame for having excused himself from going with the King, who set
such store by his company; and Sir Lancelot said he would be ruled by
her, and would ride forth next morning on his way to Winchester; “but I
should have you know,” said he, “that at the tourney I shall be against
the King and his Knights.”

“Sir,” answered Sir Bernard, “you shall have your wish, for you seem one
of the goodliest Knights in the world.

As soon as her
father told her that Sir Lancelot was going to the tourney she besought
him to wear her token in the jousts, but he was not willing.

But then he remembered that he was
to go disguised to the tourney, and because he had before never worn any
manner of token of any damsel, he bethought him that, if he should take
one of hers, none would know him.

At earliest dawn the
trumpets blew, and King Arthur took his seat upon a high scaffold, so
that he might see who had done best; but he would not suffer Sir Gawaine
to go from his side, for Sir Gawaine never won the prize when Sir
Lancelot was in the field, and as King Arthur knew, Sir Lancelot
oftentimes disguised himself.

“Sir,” said Sir Lancelot,
“yonder is a company of good Knights and they hold together as boars
that are vexed with dogs.”

“That is truth,” said Sir Lavaine.

“Now,” said Sir Lancelot, “if you will help me a little, you shall see
King Arthur’s side, which is winning, driven back as fast as they came.”

“Spare not, Sir,” answered Sir Lavaine, “for I shall do what I may.”

“Let him be,” said Sir Arthur, “you will find out his name, and see him
do greater deeds yet, before he departs.”

When Sir Lavaine saw that, he unhorsed the
King of Scots, and brought his horse to Sir Lancelot, and helped him to
mount thereon and gave him a spear, with which Sir Lancelot smote Sir
Bors to the earth and Sir Ector de Maris, the foster-father of King
Arthur, and buffeted sorely the Knights that were with them.

And the Kings and Lords who were of
his party came round him and thanked him for the help he had given them,
by which means the honours of the day had been theirs.

“Oh help me, Sir Lavaine,” said he, “to get this spear’s head
out of my side, for it is killing me.”

And at last Sir
Lancelot opened his eyes, and said, “O Lavaine, help me on my horse, for
two miles from this place there lives a hermit who once was a Knight of
the Round Table, and he can heal my wounds.”

Then Sir Lavaine, with much
ado, helped him on his horse, and brought him bleeding to the hermit.

“Since you know me, Sir,” said he, “help me for God’s sake, and for
death or life put me out of this pain.”

“Fear nothing,” answered the hermit, “your pain will soon be gone,” and
he called his servants to take the armour off the Knight, and laid him
in bed.

After that he dressed the wound, and gave him good wine to
drink, and Sir Lancelot slept and awoke free of his pain.

So we will
leave him to be healed of his wound, under the care of the hermit, and
go back to King Arthur.

“Bring him before me,”
he said, “that he may have the prize he has won, which is his right.”
Then answered the King with the hundred Knights, “We fear the Knight
must have been sore hurt, and that neither you nor we are ever like to
see him again, which is grievous to think of.”

“Alas!” said King Arthur, “is he then so badly wounded?

“Whether I know him or not,” said King Arthur, “I shall not tell you,
but may Heaven send me good news of him.”

“By my head,” said Sir Gawaine, “if this good Knight is really wounded
unto death, it is a great evil for all this land, for he is one of the
noblest that ever I saw for handling a sword or spear.

And if he may be
found, I shall find him, for I am sure he is not far from this town;” so
he took his Squire with him, and they rode all round Camelot, six or
seven miles on every side, but nothing could they hear of him.

“Now blessed be God,” said the Maid of Astolat, “that that Knight sped
so well, for he is the man in the world that I loved first, and he will
also be the last that ever I shall love.”

“Fair Maid,” asked Sir Gawaine, “is that Knight your love?”

“Now, dear father,” said Elaine, “give me leave to ride and to seek him,
for I shall go out of my mind unless I find him and my brother.”

“Do as you will,” answered her father, “for I am grieved to hear of the
hurt of that noble Knight.”

Meanwhile fair Elaine came to Winchester to find Sir Lancelot, who lay
in peril of his life in the hermit’s dwelling.

When she came to herself
and stood up, Sir Lancelot prayed her to be of good cheer, for if she
had come to comfort him she was right welcome, and that his wound would
soon heal.

“For well I am sure,”
said Sir Lancelot, “that Sir Bors will seek me, as he is the same good
Knight that hurt me.”

Sir Bors was overjoyed to hear good
tidings of Sir Lancelot, and they rode back together to the hermitage.

“Oh, my lord Sir
Lancelot,” he said at last, “God send you hasty recovery; great is my
shame for having wounded you thus, you who are the noblest Knight in the
world.

We will not speak of it any more, for what is done cannot
be undone, but let us find a cure so that I may soon be whole.”

But is this damsel that is so busy about you the Fair Maid of
Astolat?”

“She it is, and she will not go from me!”

“Why should she go from you?” asked Sir Bors.

And there was on All
Hallows a great tournament, and Sir Bors won the prize for the unhorsing
of twenty Knights, and Sir Gareth did great deeds also, but vanished
suddenly from the field, and no man knew where he had gone.

But in token and thanks of all your good will towards me,
gladly will I give a thousand pounds yearly when you set your heart upon
some other Knight.”

“Of such gifts I will have none,” answered Elaine, “and I would have you
know, Sir Lancelot, that if you refuse to wed me, my good days are
done.”

“I cannot marry her,” answered Sir Lancelot, “and it grieves me sorely,
for she is a good maiden, fair and gentle.”

“Father,” said Sir Lavaine, “she is as pure and good as Sir Lancelot has
said, and she is like me, for since first I saw him

And after that they bade the old man farewell and came unto
Winchester, where the King and all the Knights of the Round Table made
great joy of him, save only Sir Agrawaine and Sir Mordred.

Now when the Fair Maid of Astolat knew he was gone, she would
neither eat nor sleep, but cried after Sir Lancelot all the day long.

The King
summoned Sir Kay, and bade him take Sir Brandiles and Sir Agrawaine, and
find out who was lying there, and they ran down to the river side, and
came and told the King.

And there he saw a fair woman on a rich
bed, and her clothing was of cloth of gold, and she lay smiling.

This is my last request.

God knows I was not, of my own
will, guilty of her death, and that I will call on her brother, Sir
Lavaine, to witness.

She was both fair and good, and much was I beholden
to her, but she loved me out of measure.”

“You might have been a little gentle with her,” answered the Queen, “and
have found some way to save her life.”

The maiden herself scarcely saw
or spoke to him, but did her father’s bidding in all things, and when he
desired her to make everything ready to go clothed as beseemed a
Princess to King Arthur’s Court, her heart beat with joy at the sight of
rich stuffs and shining jewels.

Then one day there rode up to the Castle
a band of horsemen sent by the King to bring her to his Court, and at
the head of them Sir Lancelot du Lake, friend of King Arthur, and winner
of all the jousts and tournaments where Knights meet to gain honour.

Day
by day they rode together apart and he told her tales of gallant deeds
done for love of beautiful ladies, and they passed under trees gay with
the first green of spring, and over hyacinths covering the earth with
sheets of blue, till at sunset they drew rein before the silken
pavilion, with the banner of Uther Pendragon floating on the top.

The King likewise held Sir Lancelot bound to fight the Queen’s
battles, and if he was absent on adventures of his own, messengers
hastened to bring him back, as in the fight with Sir Mador.

It befell one spring, in the month of May, that Queen Guenevere
bethought herself that she would like to go a-maying in the woods and
fields that lay round the City of Westminster on both sides of the
river.

To this intent she called her own especial Knights, and bade them
be ready the next morning clothed all in green, whether of silk or
cloth, “and,” said she, “I shall bring with me ten ladies, and every
Knight shall have a lady behind him, and be followed by a Squire and two
yeomen, and I will that you shall all be well horsed.”

But I tell you
that you may bring dishonour on yourself, but you will bring none on me,
for rather would I cut my throat in twain.”

“As for your threats, Madam, I pay them no heed,” returned Sir
Meliagraunce; “I have loved you many a year, and never could I get you
at such an advantage as I do now, and therefore I will take you as I
find you.”

When the Queen saw that she cried
out for pity and sorrow, “Sir Meliagraunce, spare my noble Knights and I
will go with you quietly on this condition, that their lives be saved,
and that wherever you may carry me they shall follow.

For I give you
warning that I would rather slay myself than go with you without my
Knights, whose duty it is to guard me.”

“Madam,” replied Sir Meliagraunce, “for your sake they shall be led with
you into my own castle, if you will consent to ride with me.”

But the Queen knew well
what was passing in his mind, and she called a little page who served
her in her chamber and desired him to take her ring and hasten with all
speed to Sir Lancelot, “and pray him, if he loves me, to rescue me.

[Illustration: GUENEVERE SENDS HER PAGE TO LANCELOT FOR HELP.]

The castle of Sir Meliagraunce was distant seven miles from Westminster,
so it did not take long for the boy to find Sir Lancelot, and to give
him the Queen’s ring and her message.

“I am ashamed for ever,” said Sir
Lancelot, “unless I can rescue that noble lady,” and while he put on his
armour, he called to the boy to tell him the whole adventure.

When he
was armed and mounted, he begged the page to warn Sir Lavaine where he
had gone, and for what cause.

“And pray him, as he loves me, that he
follow me to the castle of Sir Meliagraunce, for if I am a living man,
he will find me there.”

He rode along the track till he came to the wood, where the
archers were lying waiting for him, and when they saw him, they bade him
on peril of his life to go no further along that path.

“Tell me, carter,” said
Sir Lancelot, “what will you take to suffer me to go in your cart till
we are within two miles of the castle of Sir Meliagraunce?”

“I cannot take you at all,” answered the carter, “for I am come to fetch
wood for my lord Sir Meliagraunce.”

“It is with him that I would speak.”

“You shall not go with me,” said the carter, but hardly had he uttered
the words when Sir Lancelot leapt up into the cart, and gave him such a
buffet that he fell dead on the ground.

“Then I charge you,” said Sir Lancelot, “that you bring
me to the castle gate.”

“Look, Madam,” cried one of her ladies,
“in that cart yonder is a goodly armed Knight.

I suppose he is going to
his hanging.”

“Where?” asked the Queen, and as she spoke she espied that it was Sir
Lancelot, and that his horse was following riderless.

“Well is he that
has a trusty friend,” said she, “for a noble Knight is hard pressed when
he rides in a cart,” and she rebuked the lady who had declared he was
going to his hanging.

“It was foul talking, to liken the noblest Knight
in the world to one going to a shameful death.”

By this Sir Lancelot had
come to the gate of the castle, and he got down and called till the
castle rang with his voice.

“What ails you now?” said she; “of a truth I might well expect some good
Knight to avenge me, though my lord Arthur knew not of your work.”

“Sir Lancelot,” asked the Queen, “what is the cause of all this wrath?”

“Madam,” replied Sir Lancelot, “does such a question come from you?

“Why do you say that?” asked the Queen; “do you repent yourself of your
good deeds?

“Madam,” answered Sir Lancelot, “you understand full well that I was
never glad of slander nor noise, but there is neither King, Queen, nor
Knight alive, save yourself, Madam, and my lord Arthur, that should
hinder me from giving Sir Meliagraunce a cold heart before I departed
hence.”

“That I know well,” said the Queen, “but what would you have more?
Everything shall be ordered as you will.”

“Then let us go to dinner,” said Sir Meliagraunce, “and
afterwards you may all ride to Westminster.

When they arrived the Knights told of their adventure,
and how Sir Meliagraunce had accused the Queen of treason, and how he
and Sir Lancelot were to fight for her good name in eight days.

“Sir Lancelot,” said she, “you are not wise, for without my
help you will never get out of this prison, and if you do not appear on
the day of battle, your lady, Queen Guenevere, will be burnt in
default.”

And sure I am that there is some good Knight who loves me or is
of my kin, that will take my quarrel in hand, therefore you cannot
frighten me by such words as these.

As the hours passed on and Sir Lancelot did not come, Sir Meliagraunce
called ever on King Arthur to burn the Queen, or else bring forth Sir
Lancelot, for he deemed full well that he had Sir Lancelot safe in his
dungeon.

“Most noble Knight, save my life,” cried he, “for I yield
myself unto you, and put myself into the King’s hands and yours.”

As was told in the tale of the marriage of Arthur, Queen Guenevere’s
heart had gone out to Lancelot on the journey to the Court, and ever she
loved to have him with her.

But they let so many of their fellowship into the secret of their
foul plot, that at last it came to the ears of Sir Bors, who begged Sir
Lancelot not to go near the Queen that day, or harm would come of it.

Then he
took the Queen in his arms and kissed her, and said, “Most noble
Christian Queen, I beseech you, as you have ever been my special good
lady, and I at all times your true poor Knight, and as I never failed
you in right or in wrong, since the first day that King Arthur made me
Knight, that you will pray for my soul, if I be here slain.

For I am
well assured that Sir Bors, my nephew, and Sir Lavaine and many more,
will rescue you from the fire, and therefore, mine own lady, comfort
yourself whatever happens to me, and go with Sir Bors, my nephew, and
you shall live like a Queen on my lands.”

well you know you cannot escape us,
and we will save your life and bring you before King Arthur.”

Then came forward a strong Knight, Sir
Colegrevance of Gore, who struck fiercely at Lancelot with his sword.

But Sir Lancelot
cried to them all to go away and he would appear next morning before the
King, and they should accuse him of what they would, and he would answer
them, and prove his words in battle.

“Fie on you, traitor,” said Sir
Agrawaine, “we have you in our power, to save or to slay, for King
Arthur will listen to our words, and will believe what we tell him.”

“As you like,” answered Sir Lancelot, “look to yourself,” and he flung
open the chamber door, and strode in amongst them and killed Sir
Agrawaine with his first blow, and in a few minutes the bodies of the
other twelve Knights lay on the ground beside his, for no man ever
withstood that buffet of Sir Lancelot’s.

When the clamour of the battle was
still, Sir Lancelot turned back to the Queen and said, “Alas, Madam,
they will make King Arthur my foe, and yours also, but if you will come
with me to my castle, I will save you from all dangers.”

“I will not go with you now,” answered the Queen, “but if you see
to-morrow that they will burn me to death, then you may deliver me as
you shall think best.”

So we put on
armour that we might help you whatever need you were in.”

“I
pray you, my fellows, that you will be of good courage and stand by me
in my need, for war is come to us all.”

“Sir,” answered Sir Bors, “all is welcome that God sends us, and we have
had much good with you and much fame, so now we will take the bad as we
have taken the good.”

“I thank you for your comfort in my great distress,” replied Sir
Lancelot, “and you, fair nephew, haste to the Knights who are in this
place, and find who is with me and who is against me, for I would know
my friends from my foes.”

“Sir,” said Sir Bors, “before seven of the clock in the morning you
shall know.”

And Sir Bors answered Sir Lancelot that it was truly his part to rescue
the Queen, as he had done so often before, and that if she was burned
the shame would be his.

“It is a
bitter blow,” he said, “that Sir Lancelot must be against me, and the
fellowship of the Table Round is broken for ever, as many a noble Knight
will go with him.

Put on, therefore, your
best armour, and go with your brothers, Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, and
bring the Queen to the fire, there to have her judgment and suffer her
death.”

“Nay, my lord, that I will never do,” cried Sir Gawaine; “my heart will
never serve me to see her die, and I will never stand by and see so
noble a lady brought to a shameful end.”

And if we
go we shall be dressed as men of peace, and wear no armour.”

But I charge you that none tell Sir Gawaine of the
death of his brothers, for I am sure that when he hears of Sir Gareth he
will go out of his mind.

My heart was never so
heavy as it is now, and far more grievous to me is the loss of my good
Knights, than of my Queen; for Queens I might have in plenty, but no man
had ever such a company of Knights, and it hurts me sore that Sir
Lancelot and I should be at war.

And had Sir Lancelot desired my brother to go with him, he would
have turned his back on us all.

Then he ran to the
King, crying, “O King Arthur, mine uncle, my good brother Sir Gareth is
slain, and Sir Gaheris also,” and the King wept with him.

At length Sir
Gawaine said, “Sir, I will go and see my brother Sir Gareth.”

“You cannot do that,” returned the King, “for I have caused him to be
buried with Sir Gaheris, as I knew well that the sight would cause you
overmuch sorrow.”

“How came he, Sir Lancelot, to slay Sir Gareth?” asked Sir Gawaine;
“mine own good lord, I pray you tell me, for neither Sir Gareth nor Sir
Gaheris bore arms against him.”

And I will go to the world’s end till I find him.”

And at such times, my lord Arthur, you loved me and thanked me
when I saved your Queen from the fire, and promised ever to be my good
lord, for I have fought for her many times in other quarrels than my
own.

“My lord Arthur,” he
said, “for God’s love, stop this strife.

However, as to the Queen Sir
Gawaine said nothing; and King Arthur gave audience to the Bishop, and
swore on his great seal that he would take back the Queen as the Pope
desired, and that if Sir Lancelot brought her he should come safe and go
safe.

“It was never in
my thought,” answered Sir Lancelot, “to withhold the Queen from King
Arthur, but as she would have been dead for my sake it was my part to
save her life, and to keep her from danger till better times came.

And I
thank God that the Pope has made peace, and I shall be a thousand times
gladder to bring her back than I was to take her away.

Therefore ride to
the King, and say that in eight days I myself will bring the Lady
Guenevere unto him.”

A goodly host of a hundred Knights rode eight days later from the Castle
of Joyous Gard; every Knight was clothed in green velvet, and held in
his hand a branch of olive, and bestrode a horse with trappings down to
his heels.

He and
the Queen wore dresses of white and gold tissue, and their horses were
clothed in housings of the same, set with precious stones and pearls;
and no man had ever gazed on such a noble pair, as they rode from Joyous
Gard to Carlisle.

When they reached the castle, Sir Lancelot sprang from
his horse and helped the Queen from hers, and led her to where King
Arthur sat, with Sir Gawaine and many lords around him.

But Sir Gawaine would not suffer the King to listen to
anything Sir Lancelot said, and told him roughly that while one of them
lived peace could never be made, and desired on behalf of the King that
in fifteen days he should be gone out of the country.

For his sake the King
had all battles before him take place just before noon, and few knew of
this advantage save King Arthur.

Now, when King Arthur left England to fight with Sir Lancelot, he
ordered his nephew Sir Mordred to govern the land, which that false
Knight did gladly.

Queen
Guenevere’s soul grew cold and heavy as she heard these words of Sir
Mordred’s, for she hated him with all her might, as he hated her; but
she dared show nothing, and answered softly that she would do his
bidding, only she desired that first she might go to London to buy all
manner of things for her wedding.

Sir Mordred trusted her because of her
fair speech, and let her go.

Wherefore
Sir Mordred sent letters to all the people throughout the kingdom, and
many followed after him, for he had cunningly sown among them that with
him was great joy and softness of life, while King Arthur would bring
war and strife with him.

And it was agreed that the King should send
an embassage of two Knights and two Bishops unto Sir Mordred, and offer
him as much goods and lands as they thought best if he would engage to
make a treaty for a month with King Arthur.

“Alas! that I should have lived to
see this day,” cried the King, “for now I am come to mine end; but would
to God that I knew where were that traitor Sir Mordred that hath caused
all this mischief.”

For, blessed be God, you have won the field, and we three
be alive, and of the others none is alive save Sir Mordred himself.

[Illustration: THE LAST BATTLE / Sir Mordred]

“Would that I could quit this place to go to some large town,” said the
King, when he had heard this, “but I cannot stand, my head works so.

“Alas!” said the King, “he has died for my sake, and he had more need of
help than I.

But he would not complain, his heart was so set to help me.

Therefore, Sir Bedivere, cease moaning and weeping, and
take Excalibur, my good sword, and go with it to yonder water-side, and
when thou comest there, I charge thee, throw my sword in that water, and
come again and tell me what thou hast seen.”

But when he looked at that noble sword, and beheld the
jewels and gold that covered the pommel and hilt, he said to himself,
“If I throw this rich sword into the water no good will come of it, but
only harm and loss;” so he hid Excalibur under a tree, and returned unto
the King and told him his bidding was done.

“Go back, and do my
command; spare not, but throw it in.”

“Alas!” said the King, “help me hence, for I have tarried overlong;” and
Sir Bedivere took him on his back, and bare him to the water-side.

“Ah, my lord Arthur!” cried Sir Bedivere, “what shall become of me now
you go from me, and I am left here alone with my enemies?”

[Illustration: EXCALIBVR RETVRNS TO THE MERE]

“Comfort yourself,” replied the King, “and do as well as you may, for I
go unto the valley of Avilion, to be healed of my grievous wound.

Now when Queen Guenevere heard of the battle, and
how that King Arthur was slain and Sir Mordred and all their Knights,
she stole away, and five ladies with her, and rode to Amesbury; and
there she put on clothes of black and white, and became a nun, and did
great penance, and many alms deeds, and people marvelled at her and at
her godly life.

But since it is so, I will myself ride and seek my
lady Guenevere in the west country, where they say she has gone, and
tarry you here, I entreat you, for fifteen days, and if I should not
return take your ships and depart into your own country.”

Sir Bors strove to reason with him that the quest was fruitless, and
that in the west country he would find few friends; but his words
availed nothing.

It was caused by the sight of yonder Knight
who stands there, and I pray you bring him to me.”

Therefore, Sir Lancelot, I require and pray you never to see my face
again, but go back to your own land, and govern it and protect it; and
take to yourself a wife, and pray that my soul may be made clean of its
ill doing.”

For if in the quest of the Sangreal I had forsaken its vanities
with all my heart and will, I had passed all Knights in the quest,
except Sir Galahad my son.

And therefore, lady, since you have taken you
to perfection, I must do so also, and if I may find a hermit that will
receive me I will pray and do penance while my life lasts.

After the fifteen days were ended, and still Sir Lancelot did not
return, Sir Bors made the great host go back across the sea, while he
and some of Sir Lancelot’s kin set forth to seek all over England till
they found Sir Lancelot.

“By the time
that thou come there,” said the vision, “thou shalt find Queen Guenevere
dead; therefore take thy fellows with thee and fetch her corpse, and
bury it by the side of her husband, the noble King Arthur.”

And I beseech Almighty God that I may never have power to see Sir
Lancelot with my bodily eyes.”

“Truly,” answered Sir Lancelot, “I trust I do not displease God, but
when I remember her beauty, and her nobleness, and that of the King, and
when I saw his corpse and her corpse lie together, my heart would not
bear up my body.

That night the hermit had a vision that he saw Sir Lancelot being
carried up to heaven by the angels, and he waked Sir Bors and bade him
go and see if anything ailed Sir Lancelot.

Thou wert the goodliest Knight that ever man has seen,
and the truest lover that ever loved a woman.”




                                 NOTES


Page 2, l. 16.

Uther Pendragon was King Arthur’s
father.

Uther Pendragon died two years after this, and on his
deathbed Merlin asked if Arthur should not be proclaimed his successor.

To this Uther Pendragon replied, “I give him my blessing, and
righteously may he claim the crown on forfeiture of my blessing.”

Gore, or Gower, is a strip of hilly country in
Glamorganshire, running out into the sea, and ending in Worm’s Head.

She is generally a good friend to King Arthur.

lesses les aller, the old French form of the “Laissez
aller” in “Ivanhoe,” meaning “Go!”

You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research.

There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works.

The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.

However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form.

Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.

To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

